ActaAstronautica211(2023)483–497 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Acta Astronautica journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro Advancement of extreme environment additively manufactured alloys for next generation space propulsion applications Paul Gradla,*, Omar R. Mirelesa, Colton Katsarelisb, Timothy M. Smithd, Jeff Sowardsb, Alison Parkc, Poshou Chene, Darren C. Tinkera, Christopher Protzb, Tom Teasleya, David L. Ellisd, Christopher Kantzosd aPropulsion Department, e, AL, 35812, USA bMaterials and Processes Laboratory, e, AL, 35812, USA cgley Research Center, Hampton, VA, 23666, USA dHigh Temperature and Smart Alloy Branch, 4135, USA eJacobs ESSCA Group, e, AL, 35812, USA A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T Keywords: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (nd matu- Additive manufacturing ration of metal additive manufacturing (AM) for space applications since the late 2000’s.
Several efforts have Propulsion focused on the understanding of AM processes through material characterization and testing, standards devel- Rockets opment, component fabrication, and infusion into propulsion development and flight applications.
aerospace alloys from various alloy families (Nickel, Copper, Stainless and Steel, GRCop-42 Aluminum, and Titanium-based) through detailed AM process and heat treatment characterization, in addition to GRCop-84 Refractory mechanical and thermophysical testing.
While these alloys are actively used in many propulsion applications, GRX-810 there is a need for ongoing AM optimized alloys using integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) erformance applications.
The applications targeted are liquid rocket engines; L-PBF advanced propulsion systems; and in-space propulsion with high heat fluxes, high pressure, and/or that use LP-DED propellants that can degrade alloys (e.g., hydrogen).
This paper highlights the characterization and physical DED properties of the more common AM alloys using laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) and laser powder directed Laser powder bed fusion energy deposition (LP-DED) processes.
Additionally, this paper discusses some of the ongoing novel alloy Laser powder directed energy deposition development and maturation using AM for use in these harsh environments, such as GRCop-42, GRCop-84, rom these processes demonstrated that AM could enable rapid devel- opment, and that optimized alloys could be developed using ICME, yielding higher performances.
These alloys have undergone modeling, fundamental metallurgical evaluations, heat treatment studies, detailed microstruc- ture characterization, and mechanical testing campaigns.
This, combined with direct application-specific component fabrication and hot-fire testing, enabled the increase of the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) through high duty-cycle testing.
A background and overview of these novel AM-enabled alloys and AM pro- cessing developments including metallurgical and mechanical property studies is presented here.
The latest advancement in the parallel component development and hot-fire testing and future developments for these alloys is also discussed.
economics, and acceptable risk [1].
The appropriate selection, utiliza- 1.
Introduction tion of metal alloys, and their processing throughout the entire component life cycle have a substantial impact on the success of the Material selection for an end-use aerospace application is critical for components once they are put into service.
[2].
Propulsion components both component and mission success.
Aerospace propulsion components are typically designed with minimal margins to reduce mass, so a provide unique challenges due to the demanding end-use environments thorough understanding of the material behavior under the expected in addition to programmatic and system requirements to meet mass, operating conditions and environment is critical.
While various * Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Paul.R.Gradl@nasa.gov (P. Gradl).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2023.06.035 Received 5 January 2023; Received in revised form 7 May 2023; Accepted 19 June 2023 Availableonline28June2023 0094-5765/PublishedbyElsevierLtdonbehalfofIAA.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Acronyms/Abbreviations LP-DED Laser Directed Energy Deposition LRE Liquid Rocket Engine AM Additive Manufacturing MTD Manufacturing Technology Demonstrator CDS Carbide Dispersion Strengthened ration DED Directed Energy Deposition NTP Nuclear Thermal Propulsion DOD or FOD Domestic or Foreign Object Debris ODS Oxide Dispersion Strengthened HEE Hydrogen Environment Embrittlement PBF Powder Bed Fusion HEI Hydrogen Embrittlement Index RCS Reaction Control System HIP Hot Isostatic Pressing RHEA Refractory High Entropy Alloys ICME Integrated Computational Materials Engineering TRL Technology Readiness Level LCF Low Cycle Fatigue UTS Ultimate Tensile Strength L-PBF Laser Powder Bed Fusion materials are used for propulsion components, metals and metal alloys over traditional methods and allows for regular and early developmental are the most common.
They often come from alloy families including manufacturing and testing to iterate designs.
Cost reduction has been aluminum-, stainless steel, titanium-, nickel- and iron-based superalloys, continuously demonstrated using AM for complex components on the copper-, refractory-, and platinum-based alloys [3].
order of 50% or greater.
To achieve these gains, AM must be applied The metals and metal alloys used for propulsion applications must intentionally and methodically to obtain potential technical and eco- meet a long list of technical requirements in addition to satisfying pro- nomic advantages with strong consideration of the alloy being used.
grammatic goals.
These requirements often include high strength-to- While AM has shown advantages for cost and schedule reductions, it also weight ratios, capacity to operate cyclical and sustained static and dy- offers new opportunities to alloy for higher performance alloys.
namic loads (i.e., long-life duty cycles), chemical compatibility with AM maturation started with a limited number of commonly available fuels and/or oxidizers, the ability to withstand both cryogenic ((cid:0) 253 ◦C) alloys – Ti6Al4V, AlSi10Mg, Inconel 625, Inconel 718, CoCr, and 316 L and elevated temperatures (often >1000 ◦C), and to have thermal stainless steel for example [1,3].
This led designers to use what was expansion coefficients equivalent to alloys to which they are mated or available, but not always what provided the optimal design solution.
joined.
These requirements stem from harsh operating of modern liquid Propulsion applications tend to be more risk-sensitive, so a design may rocket engines where chamber temperatures can exceed 3300 ◦C and lean towards the selection of common, accessible, and well-matured AM where the chamber and coolant pressures exceed 410 bar.
Programmatic alloys over a new an AM alloy that needs to be developed, characterized, goals that generally enforce weight minimization and associated per- and matured [4].
As many AM processes have become standardized and formance requirements can result in thin walls (<1 mm) that must more widely accepted, the adoption of new alloys for AM may readily withstand high heat flux.
The combination of harsh chamber conditions occur with a greatly reduced developmental cycle per material.
mal gradients often exceeding specifically identified this need for various propulsion applications as 230 ◦C through the wall, inducing high thermal stresses.
In addition to well as the gap to develop and mature new alloys using AM processes.
A demanding high performing tensile and fatigue properties, fracture specific goal in new alloy development was not only to increase the toughness is essential due to potential impacts from domestic or foreign end-use alloy performance, but also ensure robust printing to eliminate object debris (DOD or FOD).
Depending on the environment corrosion issues that can arise during traditional manufacturing.
Having the resistance and wear resistance may also be required.
Other environ- choice of new alloys that are intentionally enabled by AM could provide mental factors such as radiation, atomic oxygen, ultraviolet, or plasma many benefits: expanded design options, improved product perfor- may also place additional requirements on the properties required for a mance, and reduced post-processing costs.
ting environment thus drives the desired properties loys to meet end-use environments under alloy families such as copper, for an alloy including mechanical, physical and thermophysical.
These Fe–Ni, high temperature superalloys (i.e., ODS), and refractories.
Each properties are derived from the interconnection between the process- of these alloys has different target use applications and developed per microstructure-properties ultimately leading to end-use performance.
requirements described previously.
Alloys discussed in this paper Various traditional manufacturing processes and techniques for include GRCop-42 (Cu-4 at.% Cr-2 at.% Nb) and GRCop-84 (Cu-8 at.% aerospace components are well-matured and the alloys produced from Cr-4 at.% Nb), -810 these processes well-characterized to produce flight components.
These (NiCoCr), C-103 (Nb-10 wt%, Hf-1wt.%, Ti), Tungsten (W), and Mo- processes can include forgings, castings, machining, welding, brazing, lybdenum.
The use temperature and purpose of these custom alloys is inspections, heat treatment, and other assembly operations to fabricate shown in Table 1.
The unique category of oxide dispersion strengthened the final component and system.
The manufacturability and sequence of (ODS) nickels use a nanoscale oxide such as yttria (Y2O3), zirconia operations (including supply chain and processing economics) are (ZrO2), or thoria (ThO2) for strength and creep improvements.
necessary considerations for component and system designs but can lead Several of these alloys have roots using traditional techniques but to long lead times and cost increases.
Additionally, propulsion compo- were not advanced due to challenges with production in the wrought nents are often produced in low volumes (<100 units) and specialty form or economic reasons.
In fact, alloys such as stly if not fully amortized.
While design developed using wrought and traditional processes then shelved for 15 and integration of components and system is arduous, the years.
AM has brought about rapid development with a reduced supply manufacturing stage is when most of the program problems arise.
There chain and build process schedule.
This has revived interest in previously are opportunities to improve or replace the existing manufacturing difficult-to-process alloys or new alloys only enabled by AM.
The alloys techniques to reduce costs and eliminate non-conformances.
In addition described in this paper fill several gaps for materials needed in liquid to improving or replacing the manufacturing processes, there are op- rocket engine environments including hydrogen resistance, high pres- portunities for new alloys to enable higher performance.
sure environments, extreme temperatures, creep resistance, and a Additive Manufacturing (AM) has matured rapidly for use in pro- combination thereof.
This paper describes the importance of each of pulsion systems with many components in both flight and in develop- these AM alloys for propulsion, the development work completed on mental applications.
AM has demonstrated schedule savings of 2–10x these including the formulation, AM build processes, characterization, P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Table 1 head is attached to a gantry or robotic motion control and defined Specialty AM alloys developed with different purposes for propulsion toolpath from the part CAD geometry.
A local purge or fully inert build components.
chamber is used to reduce oxygen and a trunnion table is typical of the Max.
Use Alloy Purpose Novel AM Propulsion motion control system allowing for multiple axis orientations for part Temp.
Family Alloys Use deposition.
The hydrogen-resistant ed for use with the LP-DED allowing for large scale integral 200 Aluminum Lightweighting – Various channel wall rocket nozzles to be built.
GRCop-42 and C-103 have also 750 Copper High conductivity; GRCop-42, Combustion been built using the LP-DED process and plans are in place for GRX-810 strength at GRCop-84 Chambers LP-DED development.
temperature 800 Iron–Nickel High strength and is critical for parts to be produced suc- hydrogen resistance 1 Powerheads cessfully and for fully realizing economic benefits offered by AM.
This 900 Nickel High strength-to- – Injectors, was previously discussed in a detailed paper [3].
Attributes that can weight Turbines discriminate between the processes include overall part size, part 1100 ODS Nickel High strength at GRX-810, Injectors, complexity, feature resolution, process economics and availability, in- elevated temp; Alloy 718- Turbines reduced creep ODS dustrial maturity, post-processing, and metallurgical characteristics and 1850 Refractory Extreme temperature C-103, C- Uncooled properties.
A typical input prior to process selection is the type of alloy.
103-CDS, Chambers Each AM process has unique attributes and not all the novel alloys can be Mo, W built using all the AM processes.
Feedstock is an important discriminator as well.
The alloys defined in this paper are readily available as a powder heat treatment optimization, microstructure characterization, mechan- feedstock and are the most economical source for AM processes.
ical and thermophysical testing, and hot-fire testing.
Proper maturation GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 require gas atomization using argon to form of the alloys requires a thorough understanding of the entire AM life the chromium-niobium in suspension for the dispersion strengthening cycle from component conceptual design through end-use service life to [6].
ry atomization but successfully implement.
can be produced using gas atomization [7].
C-103 and GRX-810 also use gas atomization.
GRX-810, ODS, and carbide dispersion strengthened 2.
AM processes and development (CDS) family of alloys all require a coating process for the powder following atomization [8].
2.1.
AM processing life cycle 2.2.
ICME modeling for novel alloys The AM life cycle is inclusive of various steps that include the design and analysis of the part and build, the AM build processes with inputs Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) is a trans- including feedstock and build parameters, post-processing, and finally formative discipline that enables rapid materials development through verification and certification before the part is placed into service [3].
computational methods that integrate materials information with pro- Post-processing may include operations such as powder removal, sup- cessing and performance [9].
Infusion of ICME into AM workflows port removal, build plate removal, heat treatments (i.e., stress relief, hot provides numerous benefits such as rapid maturation of AM processed isostatic pressing (HIP), solution, aging, etc.
), cleaning, inspections, alloys from the initial formulation through development to production machining, polishing, and joining.
Since the AM process is tightly inte- of flight-certified parts [10].
ICME approaches are experiencing broad grated through all process steps, there are many opportunities where adoption, extending beyond their traditional role as academic tools, defects can manifest or improper order of operations that can reduce primarily due to the reduction in the material maturation cycle.
ss derived for AM is much more using such approaches to develop new alloys with optimal 3D printing than just printing the part.
The successful development of new AM alloys characteristics including printability of new refractory alloys and integrates all the above steps.
enhanced mechanical performance of oxide dispersion strengthened Various AM processes have been matured to produce the the usage of ICME at pplications [5].
The AM processes are for the development of such materials is described here.
categorized into melting processes and solid-state processes.
Each has A first example of ICME implementation at challenges, and many are supplemental to one tion of difficulty and expense associated with conventional refractory another.
The most commonly used AM processes to produce components metal manufacturing methods.
Under conventional manufacturing are categorized into powder bed fusion (PBF) and directed energy methodologies, refractory metal and alloy bar, plate, tube, and sheet are deposition (DED).
The PBF process, specifically laser powder bed fusion fabricated through various forming and joining cycles leading to diffi- (L-PBF) manufactures parts using a bed of powder and a laser as the culties with machining a hard material, difficulty in producing defect- energy source.
The laser melts the powder in a defined scanning strategy free joints, and high expense and material waste of high-value stocks.
to create features within a discrete layer.
The build chamber is fully Additive manufacturing can mitigate much of the waste and expense but purged and a recoater arm provides a new layer of powder to be melted requires refractory metal and alloy feedstocks that are printable (resis- in a layer-by-layer operation to build a complete component.
L-PBF is tant to formation of build defects).
There is opportunity to reexamine the most often used for fine feature components but is limited in overall refractory metal alloy space using computational approaches combined build volume.
GRCop-42, GRCop-84, GRX-810, C-103 all made use of with limited empirical validation to develop new printable alloys in the L-PBF since these alloys are used in components that require small W, Nb, Mo, and Ta families.
feature resolution such as combustion chambers and injectors.
Several metallurgical issues arise during printing of such materials: Another AM process used to manufacture custom r during terminal stages of alloy solidifica- DED, which has several variations based on feedstock and energy source tion, 2) large grain formation due to epitaxial growth and thermally (i.e., laser, electron beam, electrical arc).
The most common DED activated grain growth, and 3) a shift in ductile-to-brittle behavior to method is laser powder directed energy deposition (LP-DED) providing temperatures at or above the build temperature resulting in cracks as the medium resolution features, but exceptionally large build volumes.
LP- grain size increases.
The approach to mitigate these issues is through DED uses a deposition head equipped with off-axis or coaxial nozzles, inoculation of powder feedstocks with high melting point intermetallic which blow powder into a melt pool formed by a laser.
This deposition particles (examples include ZrC, TaC, HfC), which are optimized in size and distribution to pin grain boundaries thereby preventing grain P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 growth and associated embrittlement.
Addition of these particles alters the solidification behavior and can unfortunately promote solidification cracking during the build.
ICME tools (including CALPHAD and custom Python routines for solidification crack modeling and particle coars- ening) are used to find regions of optimal powder addition where grain growth and solidification cracking are both minimized.
Fig.
1 shows an example of hundreds of solidification cracking and particle coarsening simulations of the W–Zr–C ternary system, mapping out regions of cracking susceptibility.
Darker contours suggest compositions where a new alloy would be most crack-resistant and lighter contours suggest compositions expected to be most crack susceptible.
To map this space empirically would require hundreds of powders to be formulated and printed which is unequivocally cost prohibitive.
Yet with ICME, the composition space can be mapped on a workstation in less than 24 h, and Fig.
2.
Predicted phase stability of GRX-810 between 800–1500◦ C. No then validate computed findings empirically with a few select data detrimental phase formation is predicted above 810◦C.
points to guide production of future W and W-alloy powders using the inoculant addition approach.
composition spaces with a desired performance metric and optimize A second example involves promising results from NiCoCr ODS alloy chemistry.
Such techniques are being slowly adopted for propulsion production using L-PBF at the There is still tremendous opportunity available to infuse employed to produce a new ODS composition utilizing the equiatomic ICME into development cycles for next generation space propulsion NiCoCr system as the foundational base chemistry.
From these simula- alloys.
tions a few notable findings were made.
It was evident that Mo additions typically stabilized unwanted phases (e.g., σ, μ) and the ratio of Ti to Nb 3.
Maturation of alloys for propulsion was critical for the stabilization of MC carbides especially at 1093 ◦C.
Previous ODS alloys developed for AM indicated that grain boundary 3.1.
Alloy selection for propulsion components oxidation played a significant role in ultimate tensile strength and ductility variations.
In turn, MC carbides were targeted to improve grain Each component in a liquid rocket engine system must complete a boundary strengthening and oxidation resistance [11].
The solid solu- methodical trade to determine the appropriate alloy requirements based tion strengthening was targeted for improvement from existing Ni-based on the environment, system loads, and life requirements.
Combustion alloys while maintaining phase stability up to and at the target test chambers operate at high heat fluxes from the combustion process and temperature of 1093 ◦C.
The freezing range was targeted to remain are most often actively cooled using the propellants (generally fuel) to under 100 ◦C.
Certain elements had unexpectedly large impacts on the maintain reasonable wall temperatures and avoid melting [12].
freezing range and were assumed as unwanted additions for an alloy Copper-alloys are often used due to the high conductivity and strength at designed for printability.
Unwanted phases, namely σ and μ, were wall temperatures that can exceed 750 ◦C [13].
Low cycle fatigue (LCF) effectively suppressed as low as 810 ◦C, hence the alloy was named is often a key consideration as chambers must survive multiple starts and GRX-810.
The simulations suggested this new composition had the best sustained duty cycles for reusability.
Due to the environment from the balance between printability, strength, oxidation resistance, and pha- propellants, oxidation can lead to blanching, and hydrogen can cause se/microstructure stability.
Fig.
2 reveals the amount of each phase in hydrogen environment embrittlement [14].
500 ◦C, as predicted by the thermodynamic GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 to meet these requirements.
The Glenn model for GRX-810.
Research Center Copper- (GRCop-) alloys were developed as a high Both examples above provide a snapshot of thousands of virtual strength and high conductivity alternative to other commonly used experiments that were enabled by ICME approaches.
There is no need to copper-alloys such as C-18150 (Cu–1.5 wt% Cr–0.2 wt% Zr), NARloy-Z create hundreds of new powder lots, fabricate thousands of samples, and (Cu-3 wt.% Ag-0.5 wt% Zr), Glidcop-15 (Cu-0.15 wt% Al2O3), and then perform extensive material evaluations.
Instead, commercial off- C-18200 (Cu–1.2 wt% Cr).
the-shelf and custom codes may be used to rapidly screen large A general comparison of the copper-alloys is shown in Fig.
3 comparing conductivity with yield strength at elevated temperature (600 ◦C).
A single plot is often difficult to capture the entire material trade since only two of the criteria are shown and can also change at elevated temperatures or different conditions.
For instance, pure copper is limited to approximately 200 ◦C before it reaches a significant reduction in strength.
Other copper alloys such as C-18150 and C-18200 are generally limited to nominal operating temperatures of around 540 ◦C due to reduced strength or changes in thermal properties due to the sustained temperatures.
Another key component in a liquid rocket engine is the exhaust nozzle, which is typically regeneratively-cooled (regen) due to the high heat flux.
The joint between the chamber and nozzle is appropriately selected to balance the heat flux with minimizing overall system weight.
While the chamber uses copper-alloys for high conductivity, the regen nozzle is made from a higher strength-to-weight alloy, typically a stainless steel or superalloy.
The en nozzle applications using hydrogen as a propellant, allowing for hydrogen resistance which otherwise causes hydrogen environment embrittlement (HEE) issues.
The .
Calculated solidification cracking susceptibility of the W–Zr–C ternary was specifically formulated for high ultimate strength, yield strength, system.
Dark contours represent regions of lowest cracking susceptibility.
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 very low HEI along with a high ultimate tensile strength (UTS) at 600 ◦C.
This is a typical operating temperature for the e operating temperatures can exceed this tem- perature based on the environment and engine requirements.
Other al- loys such as 316 L can meet the HEI requirement, but with a significant reduction in strength.
Superalloys such as Alloy 625 (Inconel 625) and Alloy 718 (Inconel 718) can be used in this environment but will require a significant reduction in material properties and frequent inspections to account for the HEE.
high strength, HEE resistance, LCF life, thermal conductivity, and ductility to meet the channel-cooled nozzle requirements for engines using hydrogen or other propellants (i.e., methane, liquid natural gas).
Propulsion components such as rocket injectors, nozzles, turbine blades, combustors, and other hot section components operate at elevated temperatures for sustained durations and multiple engine starts.
Typically Ni-based superalloys are used in these environments but are generally limited to 900 ◦C or less in most cases for sustained operation.
While γ′ precipitate strengthened Ni-alloys can sustain some minimal mechanical properties at temperatures up to 1200 ◦C, this is not a realistic design temperature for this type of material.
This can limit the performance of these components and the overall system may not be optimized due to temperature limits in a turbine or injector faceplate.
Other challenges with current components include creep rupture, which is a necessary design consideration for sustained durations and high duty cycles such as those for aircraft engines.
Fig.
3.
Comparison plot of copper-alloy selection based on conductivity and yield strength at 600◦C.
Data compiled from Refs.
[15–17].
GRX-810 (Glenn Research Center eXtreme) alloy was developed and is being further matured to allow an increase in operating temperatures for these various components.
The alloy is Ni–Co–Cr-based and in- and elongation in this environment and superior weldability, which corporates ODS coating of the powder to allow the high performance at translates into good printability.
LCF is also a strong consideration in the elevated temperature.
Traditionally manufactured ODS alloys were nozzle design since it is tested and flown for multiple starts and missions.
plagued with high expenses due to the manufacturing process [18], but The conductivity was also improved in the LP-DED version of the alloy AM is enabling more economical high performance ODS alloys, like compared to the wrought version to aid with the design for nozzles.
GRX-810, to be produced.
It is also enabling for high-complexity ODS A comparison plot is shown in Fig.
4 for various superalloys, stainless alloy components such as injectors.
steel alloys and dex While operating temperatures and creep are a couple of consider- (HEI) along with the ultimate strength at elevated temperature.
While ations, the mechanical properties such as ultimate and yield as well as almost no metals are fully resistant to hydrogen, HEI values below about physical properties such as density need to be considered for optimal 20% are not as susceptible to embrittlement.
The compared to other superalloys and ODS superalloys is shown in Fig.
5.
For reference, AM Ni–Co–Cr using L-PBF is also shown on the same graph but is without the yttria addition pre- sent in GRX-810.
The strength of the GRX-810 with the ODS nearly doubles the strength at temperature.
An additional advantage of ODS alloys includes improved oxidation properties at elevated temperatures by promoting and stabilizing Alumina or Chromia oxide scale formation [19].
The creep rupture life of GRX-810 increases orders of magnitude over more traditional Ni-based superalloys such as Alloy 625 and Alloy 718 at 1093 ◦C based on testing at metals such as Niobium (Nb), Molybdenum (Mo), Tantalum (Ta), Rhenium (Re), and Tungsten (W) and their alloys are used for extreme high temperature environment service.
Refractory metals are desirable due to a high melt temperature (Tm) and the ability to retain strength and hardness at elevated temperatures, but with the exception of Nb, they have higher densities than Ni-base superalloys [21].
Examples of applications include in-space radiatively cooled thrusters, reaction control system (RCS) thrusters, nuclear thermal propulsion (NTP) fuel and structure, hypergolic and green propulsion chambers, nuclear power system in-core heat pipes and heat exchangers, electric propulsion, and plasma facing components in fusion reactors.
Refractory metals and alloys extend the operating temperature to be- tween 1100 and 2500 ◦C, depending on the selected material, as shown in the red bullets in Fig.
6.
Selection of a specific metal or alloy is highly dependent on expected operating conditions including temperature, environment (i.e., oxidizing, reducing, inert, vacuum), stresses, neutron Fig.
4.
Comparison plot of fluence, etc.
comparing the hydrogen embrittlement index (higher HEI =more susceptible) to ultimate strength at 600 ◦C.
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Fig.
5.
Comparison of ultimate tensile strength at elevated temperature (1093 ◦C) with density for GRX-810 and other ODS alloys as well as Ni-based superalloys.
Table 2 Chemistry of GRCop-42 and GRCop-84.
Element GRCop-42 wt % GRCop-84 wt % Cu Balance Balance Cr 3.1–3.4 6.2–6.8 Nb 2.7–3.0 5.4–6.0 Fe Target <50 ppm Target <50 ppm O Target <250 ppm Target <250 ppm Al Target <100 ppm Target <100 ppm Si Target <100 ppm Target <100 ppm Cr:Nb Ratio, wt.
% 1.13–1.18 1.13–1.18 strength and good LCF properties, there was a desire to improve the thermal conductivity.
n 2018 to mature the alloy through development of material properties, component demonstrations, and hot-fire testing.
A critical task in developing these alloys were the establishment of the powder supply chain and commercial print services to permit accessibility of the GRCop alloys for commercial space use.
As of 2023, more than eight interna- tional vendors are actively producing the GRCop powder and more than 12 commercial print services providing this as a standard material option.
An extensive effort was established to develop properties related to the GRCop alloys and to make these accessible to industry.
Due to the dispersion strengthening, the GRCop alloys do not require heat treat- Fig.
6.
Refractory elemental density compared to melting point at 1 atm.
ment.
Only a HIP is required to achieve full density.
The typical tensile strengths as a function of temperature for L-PBF GRCop-42 and GRCop- 4.
High conductivity GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 84 is shown in Fig.
7.
Advantages of GRCop alloys are high conductivity, good strength at elevated temperatures, and stability during operation The GRCop alloys are dispersion strengthened through Cr2Nb pre- [26].
The GRCop-84 has demonstrated higher strength at various tem- cipitates created during the powder atomization and refined during L- peratures due to the higher content of Cr2Nb and slightly improved low PBF processing [22].
The GRCop alloys were specifically formulated for cycle fatigue properties.
The advantage of the GRCop-42 alloy is a high strength at temperature, HEE resistance, high conductivity, and 15–20% higher thermal conductivity as shown in Fig.
8. long low-cycle fatigue (LCF) lives.
The chemical composition for cturing and testing of GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 is shown in Table 2.
The GRCop alloys also over 60+ combustion device components.
The commercial space in- have improved oxidation and blanching resistance competed to most dustry is also making use of GRCop-42 in development and flight ap- low-alloy Cu-based alloys [23,24].
GRCop alloys allow hot wall tem- plications.
These include channel-cooled chambers, injectors, and peratures of ≥700 ◦C depending upon the strength, creep, and LCF ignition systems using L-PBF.
Additional development work has been requirements.
completed using the LP-DED process, but no components have been In 2014, s for GRCop- tested using this process as of this publication.
Upper Stage Program (LCSUP) and successfully hot-fire validated chambers at over 1200 starts and greater than 45,000 built and hot-fire tested various chambers.
Material and property char- s of cumulative duration as of this publication.
One GRCop-42 L-PBF acterizations were also performed [25].
While the GRCop-84 had high chamber was successfully tested with over 10,000 s and 293 starts, and a P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Fig.
7.
Typical average ultimate tensile and yield strength vs. temperature for L-PBF GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 alloys.
Fig.
9.
Development and hot-fire testing of GRCop-alloy chambers.
A) Hot-fire testing of a 31 kN LOX/CH4 lander GRCop-42 chamber for 51 cycles, B) Pol- ished GRCop-42 chamber, C) Bimetallic chamber using L-PBF GRCop-42 liner and en found to be extensive.
L-PBF of GRCop alloys has been demonstrated for custom and complex designs to balance heat transfer and friction factors (pressure drop).
Customization of surface roughness, waviness, and porosity in the L-PBF process allows engineers a broader trade space for liquid rocket engine design.
High porosity allows production of transpiration features for active cooling of com- ponents such as an injector faceplate.
Surface roughness reductions or increases allow for the customization of the desired engine heat load balanced with increasing or decreasing friction factors within the chamber channels.
This impacts downstream component performance such as injector combustion efficiency by controlling coolant exit tem- perature and turbopump power requirements.
Lastly, while oxygen compatibility of GRCop alloys has not been quantified, observations from hot-fire testing suggests high tolerance to oxygen rich combustion Fig.
8.
Average conductivity vs. temperature for L-PBF GRCop-42 and environments.
GRCop-84.
Additional development using GRCop alloys has been demonstrated using multiple alloys with various AM processes (bimetallic or multi- second chamber achieved over 7400 s and over 168 starts.
GRCop alloys metallic).
This has allowed for the high conductivity and high strength have also enabled the development and long-duration testing of new GRCop liner and a higher strength-to-weight alloy, such as Alloy 625 or propulsion concepts such as Rotating Detonation Rocket Engines Additional development (RDRE) [27].
These statistics demonstrate the robustness and versatility under ulsion Technol- of the GRCop alloys.
No damage to the chambers from blanching or ogy (RAMPT) project using axial bimetallic methods with GRCop-42 cracks were observed.
- have enabled larger thrust chamber assemblies with multiple alloys Hydrogen (LOX/H2), LOX/Kerosene (LOX/RP-1), and LOX/Methane and elimination of a bolted joint between the chamber and nozzle [28].
(LOX/CH4) using various GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 chambers.
Examples p alloy calorimetry of hot-fire testing and development chamber units are shown in Fig.
9. chambers.
These chambers have provided heat flux profiles for constant Furthermore, the potential for rocket propulsion applications using P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 pressure and rotating detonative combustion devices (i.e., RDRE) [29, Table 3 30].
GRCop alloys provided the properties to enable these high heat flux Nominal chemical composition for AM GRCop alloys is substantial, and an in- Element % Target vestment ercial partners.
Fe BAL 41.2 The powder production process and L-PBF process parameters have Ni 33.7–34.3 34 been fully commercialized and are in use across the propulsion industry.
Cr 14.3–14.9 14.6 Development has also started using LP-DED to build parts with infrared Mo 1.6–2.0 1.8 and green wavelength lasers for monolithic and bimetallic components.
V 0.28–0.32 0.3 W 1.4–1.8 1.6 An example of demonstrator chambers using GRCop-42 and GRCop-42/ Co 3.6–4.0 3.8 Alloy 625 green laser LP-DED manufacturing technology is shown in Ti 2.2–2.6 2.4 Fig.
10.
Al 0.23–0.27 0.25 5.
Hydrogen resistant the LP-DED alloy while improving strengthened superalloy the ductility, LCF life, and HEE resistance from the initial composition tested in LP-DED [34].
designed to resist high pressure hydrogen environment embrittlement Significant development of heat treatments and material character- (HEE), oxidation, and corrosion [2].
LP-DED ti- from JBK-75 for increased strength and ductility in high-pressure mize the microstructure of LP-DED environments to meet the requirements of liquid rocket en- segregation and η-phase problems, the subsequent powder composition gine (LRE) applications.
justments also required further adjustments to heat treatments to strength, thermal conductivity, ductility, and LCF while minimizing HEE mitigate η-phase as it can severely impact the HEE resistance of al composition of and Al), added W and Co, and HR-1 [4].
Changes to the stress relief, homogenization, and solution treatment times and temperatures helped to minimize Ti segregation adjusted the Fe and Ni content [31].
Wrought process, and the aging cycle was changed from a and tedious processing that was not economically feasible for LRE 1-step to a 2-step age at as this was observed to mitigate η-phase while components.
However, powder AM processes, such as LP-DED, have minimizing the yield strength drop and improving ductility [5].
enabled LRE applications.
Once the heat treatments were determined, efforts focused on While adapting overed characterizing the mechanical and thermophysical properties of regation and formation of detrimental η-phase more than the conventional wrought process [32, HR-1.
Tensile and low cycle fatigue have been tested across a range of temperatures and testing has been performed in pressurized gaseous 33].
As a result, the composition of (GH2) environments to assess the HEE resistance of LP-DED AM variant revision shown in Table 3.
The changes made were expected h of various LP-DED al- loys compared to the 1-step age for higher strength or the 2-step age for more ductility, 5.
Compared to wrought th but higher ductility showing one of many differences between wrought and AM materials [5].
Additionally, LCF testing has shown that LP-DED s ranging from (cid:0) 196 ◦C to 760 ◦C (Fig.
12) Fig.
10.
Manufacturing demonstrator chambers using A) GRCop-42 and B) GRCop-42/Alloy 625 LP-DED green laser.
[Courtesy: RPMI/TRUMPF/ength of LP-DED alloys versus temperature.
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 combustion device components targeting channel wall nozzles.
The LP- DED process has shown robustness to produce large structures with in- tegral coolant channels as well as thicker wall components for forging and casting replacements.
Various parameters and corresponding laser melt pools can be varied to allow for different features.
A lower power allows for thin walls to be deposited at 1-mm thickness for channel wall nozzles [37].
The higher power increases the deposition rates for thicker wall components that are often final machined and have limited internal features.
The components demonstrated include powerhead half shells (i.e., for the RS-25 Engine’s powerhead), manifolds for nozzles and chambers, transfer tubes, domes, and other pressure loaded components that are used in hydrogen environments.
The LP-DED process was also used to build a manufacturing technology demonstrator (MTD) at 1.52 m diameter and 1.78 m height, approximately a 65% scale RS-25 channel wall nozzle (Fig.
14).
demonstrate nozzles manufactured using the ting of a 31 kN nozzle under mbly (LLAMA) project demonstrated 40 starts and 568 s in a LOX/CH4 environment (Fig.
15A and B).
The chamber pres- Fig.
12.
Average LCF life of 2-Step aged LP-DED bly was 52 bar, and the mixture ratio was approxi- temperature compared to wrought values in GHe from [2,6].
mately 3.2.
Another test campaign using LOX/GH2 demonstrated high- duty cycle hot-fire testing of a equivalent or slightly lower LCF life at room temperature were 8.9 kN thrust, and the nozzle achieved 207 starts and just under compared to wrought 6].
6800 s (Fig.
15F).
This demonstrated temperatures exceeding 760 ◦C on A 1-step aging cycle was shown to increase strength with a slight the nozzle hot wall with a chamber pressure over 76 bar and mixture detriment to low cycle fatigue life.
These differences in mechanical ratios up to 7.5 using LOX/GH2 propellants.
Additional o compositional and microstructural dif- DED units were tested under this campaign with unique design features ferences between the wrought and LP-DED material.
A study on including a scalloped hot wall (tube-like) and spiral channels (Fig.
15E).
thin-wall builds with reused powder has also been completed with All units performed as intended and met performance predictions.
Two LP-DED or LCF properties additional ompleted after six reuses [36].
manufacturing and successfully tested using LOX/LH2 at the 156 kN Thermal conductivity is another key property for LP-DED e units included a spiraled channel 1, and test results are shown in Fig.
13 where ated ther LP-DED superalloys.
The conductivity for approximately 14 days and the manifolds were similar to Alloy 625 and Alloy 718 and showed an improvement over about 3 days each compared to 6+ months for conventionally wrought essfully demonstrated for various Fig.
13.
Thermal conductivity of LP-DED 5% scale RS-25 integral channel LP-DED nozzle using 8 m height).
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Fig.
15. egral channel LP-DED nozzle tested in LOX/methane and LOX-cooled, C,D) 156 kN thrust chamber assembly and testing E) Spiral tube-like hot wall LP-DED nozzle, F) Hot-fire in LOX/hydrogen testing of 8.9 kN nozzle that accumulated 207 starts and 6800 s. manufactured nozzles.
ll Table 4 nozzles (Fig.
15B) made with LP-DED of ODS alloys explored and developed at en environments.
A total of 313 starts and 10,140 s of hot-fire testing has been accumulated across eight as of 2022.
NiCoCr-ODS NiCoCtReB-ODS GRX-810 Ni BAL.
BAL.
BAL.
6.
High temperature superalloy GRX-810 Co 32 32 33 Cr 30 30 29 Re – 1.5 1.5 GRX-810 is a NiCoCr-based ODS alloy specifically developed for AM.
Al – – 0.3 The equiatomic NiCoCr system has been shown to be quite amenable to Ti – – 0.25 AM [38–40].
This has been attributed to the alloys narrow melting/- Nb – – 0.75 freezing temperature range, the difference between the solidus and W – – 3 liquidus [41].
These studies have reported that the alloy maintains a C – – 0.05 B – 0.003 – solid solution in both the as-built and heat-treated conditions [40,41].
In addition, the AM-produced NiCoCr alloy provides exceptional ductility and strain hardening, comparable to its wrought counterparts.
In order To produce ODS GRX-810 components, pre-alloyed base powder to further improve the high temperature properties of the NiCoCr alloy, with the above composition is coated with <1 wt% Y2O3 nanoparticles.
a coating process for the AM powder feedstock was matured to produce Through L-PBF AM print parameter optimization, these nanoscale ox- oxide dispersion strengthened components as described by Smith et al.
ides are randomly and evenly dispersed throughout the microstructure [41].
From this work, three different alloys were explored with the as can be seen below is Fig.
16. composition shown in Table 4.
Notably, out of the three compositions, Scanning electron microscopy images of HIPed GRX-810 reveals a GRX-810 provided magnitudes of order better creep strength compared solid solution microstructure with Nb and Ti-rich MC carbides along to the NiCoCr-ODS and NiCoCtReB-ODS [42].
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Fig.
16.
A scanning electron micrograph of HIPed GRX-810 revealing a solid Fig.
17.
The tensile properties of HIPed GRX-810 as a function of temperature.
solution matrix with grain boundary Nb-rich MC carbides and dispersed nanoscale Y2O3 particles.
grain boundaries.
Nanoscale Y2O3 particles can also be observed, though the resolution of this imaging technique cannot provide quantifiable characterization.
Notably, no bulk oxide or slag formation was observed in these samples.
From the micrograph in Fig.
16 it is apparent that the as-built grain structure is retained even after a high temperature/high stress HIP cycle.
This provides evidence that the oxides are well distributed and can maintain and stabilize the microstructure at much higher temperatures as compared to non-ODS alloys.
Though early in the alloys development phase, it presents promising mechanical results compared to the previous NiCoCr-ODS alloys as well as conventional superalloys.
The tensile and yield strengths for HIPed GRX-810 were tested from cryogenic temperatures up to 1093 ◦C.
Test results are shown below in Fig.
17 (full data in Appendix, Table A).
From Fig.
17, GRX-810 presents excellent tensile properties, specif- ically when present in extreme environments (cryogenic and high tem- perature).
The ductility of the alloy remained above 30% at every temperature tested including cryogenic temperatures where it also exhibited high strengths.
Fig.
18 compares the tensile strength of GRX- 810 to wrought Alloy 718 and 625.
Below 900 ◦C, tensile properties are higher for the precipitation strengthened superalloy 718 material.
However, at temperatures above 900 ◦C, the 718 precipitates begin to over-age and eventually dissolve at the highest temperatures.
In addi- tion, grain growth becomes detrimental to non-ODS alloys impacting the strength at elevated temperatures.
For GRX-810, this reduction in Fig.
18.
Comparison of the elevated temperature tensile properties of GRX-810 strength is much less pronounced due to the presence of the nano oxides compared to conventional wrought superalloys 718 and 625. throughout its microstructure which pin grain boundaries.
Therefore, GRX-810 presents higher strength than what was possible with non-ODS conventional superalloys at temperatures above 900 ◦C.
In Fig.
18 GRX- family of powders and the ability to additively manufacture components that may possess better properties than what is currently possible with 810 is compared to Alloys 625 and 718.
These alloys are amenable to the conventional materials and manufacturing techniques.
The technology AM process and used extensively for high temperature AM components.
to coat and build AM ODS components is not just possible in Ni-alloys Therefore, it is important that GRX-810 can also be printed using AM but is speculated to improve the fabrication of difficult to print re- techniques.
In Fig.
19, images of complex geometries and components fractory alloys or improve the properties of currently printed Cu- and Ti- that have been built with ODS feedstock is shown.
Successful hot-fire based alloys.
GRX-810 represents a new class of AM materials that is testing of multiple GRX-810 injectors and regeneratively-cooled noz- rapidly maturing.
zles was conducted at ants at the 31 kN thrust level (Fig.
19C).
Fig.
19 presents evidence of the printability of the coated NiCoCr P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 Fig.
19. a) An oxide dispersion strengthened 3D printed combustor dome and (b) complex lattice structures, (c) LOX/Methane hot-fire testing of a GRX-810 injector and nozzle.
7.
Extreme temperature refractory alloys from over-sized powder, support structures, and sacrificial geometric features to be machined away to meet surface finish requirements is Traditional refractory metal manufacturing is typically expensive typically only 5–10% of the printed part mass.
due to the high material cost, specialized powder production methods, W, Mo, Ta, Re, and various alloys of these have also been produced and unique machining and joining methods.
Specific difficulties exist in with AM techniques but with a wide range of results [45].
Although forming parts due to high ductile-to-brittle transition temperatures, printable, there is a markedly lower level of maturity due in large part to ultra-high temperature heat treatments, specialized oxidation coatings, limitations in powder suppliers that can provide pre-alloyed powder that and non-destructive evaluation (NDE) requirements also provide sig- meets AM process specifications and a lack of high temperature me- nificant challenges in manufacturing refractory components [43].
chanical testing that can meet relevant environmental conditions.
Aerospace refractory metal parts tend to be thin-walled (i.e., Commercially available elemental AM grade powder options are converging-diverging nozzles) resulting in 95–98% of the stock being expanded but currently limited to W, Mo, Ta, Re, and Nb; while avail- machined away.
Thus, the cost of feedstock for a part is 5% for the actual able alloy powders include C-103 (Nb-10Hf-1Ti-0.7Zr), Ta3W, Ta5W, part and 95% in machining waste.
Machining and waste disposal add Ta13 W, FS85 (Nb–28Ta–10 W–1Zr), TZM (Mo-0.5Ti-0.08Zr-0.02C), additional costs on top of the feedstock.
W–25Re, and Mo–44Re (numerical values have units of wt.%).
Custom Other manufacturing methods are deposition-based such as vacuum refractory high entropy alloys (RHEA) are in development and are being plasma spray, electro-deposition, etc., and tend to be slow and expensive optimized for AM leveraging CALPHAD.
processes.
They normally require mandrels that need to be removed post AM refractory metal components suffer from decreased mechanical deposition and that limit part complexity.
Due to the difficulty in properties compared to traditional manufacturing methods not only due traditional refractory metal manufacture, there are a limited number of to AM induced micro-cracking but also grain growth at elevated oper- vendors with the requisite equipment and experience [43].
ating temperatures [43].
Materials that are strengthened by fine grain AM refractory development is a rapidly growing field in AM and has AM microstructure can become ineffective at elevated temperatures as been conducted primarily with EB-PBF, L-PBF, binder jet, EW-DED, and grain growth occurs.
Refractory metals are known to experience this LP-DED AM.
In most cases, these methods show a significant cost and phenomenon.
Carbide-dispersion strengthened (CDS) process is one of schedule savings [4].
AM of C-103 is an example.
Cost of an AM C-103 the options under development at to be significantly less than the same part produced micro-cracking during the AM process but also to pin grain boundaries by conventional C-103 manufacturing, even when taking into account and retain mechanical properties at expected operating conditions.
powder feedstock costs, print time, heat treatment, final machining, and Nano powder dispersoids can be mixed with parent metal powder prior waste disposal [44].
L-PBF and LP-DED AM C-103 is now available from to the AM process similar to the ODS GRX-810 alloy or can be precipi- several commercial AM suppliers to meet increasing demand.
AM waste tated during heat treatment, such as HfO2 in AM C-103 as shown in P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 1063 ◦C tensile properties are shown in Fig.
21.
Additional process development with C-103 using LP-DED has also been successfully demonstrated.
Development of pure tungsten was demonstrated using L-PBF for complex thruster components and fine lattice structures as fine as 100 μm strut thickness [47].
L-PBF tungsten has also been demonstrated for a simulated 1 N thruster and inductively heated to 2300 ◦C as shown in Fig.
22.
8.
Summary, outlook, and future work Novel alloys are important to advance performance goals such as temperature and pressure capability, corrosion and wear resistance, and fatigue life in propulsion components.
AM has demonstrated significant schedule and cost reduction to manufacture propulsion hardware and is being used to create complex designs as it both replaces and augments traditional manufacturing techniques.
This paper emphasizes the importance of AM implementation that is deliberate and systematic to obtain the full potential of technical and economic advantages.
With an in-depth understanding of various AM processes and their applicability with respect to feedstock materials, alloys.
These AM alloys, including Copper-, Iron-, Nickel-, and Refractory-based alloys, have been inserted into various propulsion applications.
Novel alloys being advanced using AM include GRCop-42, GRCop-84, ansmission electron micrograph (TEM) of L-PBF AM as-built C- CDS, Mo, and W for specific use in rocket engines for higher perfor- 103 HfO2 precipitate distribution [43].
mance.
However, there still exists a need to develop other metallic alloys that are only possible to produce with AM to further increase engine Fig.
20.
Note on the figure that dispersoids are the brighter particles that performance.
They will enable higher operating temperatures, increased are present along grain boundaries and interdendritic regions within the pressures, and longer life in challenging environments such as oxygen- darker matrix phase.
rich staged combustion engines.
Development of AM C-103 for nstrated various use applications of AM metal alloys along with vacuum stress relief at 1100 ◦C and a HIP cycle to optimize matured and in development for rocket-propulsion components.
This properties of the alloy [44].
The achieved density exceeded 99.98% of work covered the entire life cycle of AM starting from formulation, AM the theoretical density in as built and further increased following HIP.
build processes, characterization, heat treat optimizations, microstruc- There was no substantial grain growth following stress relief.
Mechan- ture characterization, mechanical and thermophysical testing, and ical property testing of the L-PBF demonstrated the ability to achieve finally ending with the engine level hot-fire testing.
As of early 2023, properties comparable and in some cases higher than wrought.
AM C103 starts on various AM met specification minimums as well [46].
A comparison of 25 ◦C and hardware including injectors, chambers, nozzles, turbomachinery, and ignition systems with many of these using the novel alloys discussed in this paper.
Activities focused on AM optimized alloys and their process devel- opment for high performance applications will continue to be prevalent in the next 10 years, mainly because of the rapid technology advance- ment to be made in ICME.
Success in these activities will not only benefit Fig.
21.
Wrought vs. L-PBF C-103 ambient and elevated temperature Fig.
22.
A) L-PBF Tungsten 1 N green propulsion chamber, B) heated mechanical property comparison [44].
to 2300 ◦C.
P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 as the global space econ- Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, omy.
AM has become one more tool in the manufacturing toolbox and is Investigation.
being accepted for fundamental rapid alloy development and production of components.
Declaration of competing interest While there are still many lessons learned in the characterization of metal AM parts and alloys, the AM processes are becoming more widely The authors declare that they have no known competing financial adopted.
In addition, the local aspect of AM, where organizations are interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence now largely responsible for material integrity that is essential to their the work reported in this paper.
component production, cannot be ignored, particularly with new alloys.
The immediate impact is a new emphasis on being integrated across Acknowledgements disciplines and throughout the life cycle of AM components and as- semblies.
To successfully integrate these AM alloys requires discipline to This research was funded by follow a methodical plan.
Well-written standards and speci- development efforts through the Rapid Analysis and Manufacturing fications can help vastly.
The intentional development of AM alloys for Propulsion Technology (RAMPT), Optimized and Repeatable Compo- specialized aerospace applications is expected to grow, but focus should nents using Additive (ORCA), Refractory Additive Alloy Manufacturing be maintained to fully mature all aspects of the AM life cycle including and Build Optimization (RAAMBO), and Transformational Tools and property development and demonstration in the application environ- Technologies projects.
This paper describes objective technical results ment.
The outlook of AM alloy development for of extreme environ- and analysis.
Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed ments is very promising.
in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (ons Government.
The results from this study are solely for informational purposes and not an endorsement of any techniques by the authors, their P.R.G.
– Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, employers, or the publishing journal.
Investigation, Resources; O.R.M.
– Conceptualization, Methodology, The authors would like to thank various partners in the development Writing – Original Draft, Investigation, Resources; C.K.
– Conceptuali- and advancement of these various alloys including RPM Innovations, zation, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Investigation; T.M.S.
– Tyler Blumenthal/RPMI, Launcher Space (Tim Berry, Max Haot, Andre Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Investiga- Ivankovic), AME, Elementum 3D, Castheon (ADDMan), Powder Alloy tion; J.S.
–Methodology, Writing – Original Draft, Investigation; A.P.
– Corp, Praxair, ATI, Noah Burchett, Declan Dink Murphy, Louisiana State Methodology, Review & Editing; P⋅S.C.
– Conceptualization, Method- University (LSU) for conductivity testing, Auburn University for char- ology, Investigation, Review & Editing; D.C.T.
– Review & Editing; C⋅S.
acterization of many P. – Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Review individuals involved in the development of these alloys across Investigation; D.L.E.
– Conceptual- industry – thank you.
Thank you to Lynn Machamer for help with ization, Methodology, Investigation, Review & Editing; C.A.K.
– graphics and formatting.
Appendix A Table A Tensile properties of HIPed GRX-810 with respect to temperature.
Temp.
(◦C) Tensile Strength (MPa) Yield Strength (MPa) Elong.
(%) (cid:0) 195.6 1227.3 723.9 49 21.1 848.1 515.0 43 426.7 655.0 410.2 40 648.9 630.9 368.9 43 871.1 262.7 206.2 62 1000.0 164.1 161.3 44 1093.3 119.3 115.8 32 References Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA, 2018, https://doi.org/ 10.2514/6.2018-4625.
[6] P.R.
Gradl, C.S.
Protz, D.L.
Ellis, S.E.
Greene, Progress in additively manufactured [1] B. Blakey-Milner, P. Gradl, G. Snedden, M. Brooks, J. Pitot, E. Lopez, et al., Metal copper-alloy GRCop-84, GRCop-42, and bimetallic combustion chambers for liquid additive manufacturing in aerospace: a review, Mater.
Des.
209 (2021), 110008, rocket engines, Proc.
Int.
Astronaut.
Congr.
IAC 2019 October 21 (2019) 21–25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2021.110008.
[7] P.R.
Gradl, C.S.
Protz, Technology advancements for channel wall nozzle [2] B.N.
Bhat (Ed.
), Aerospace Materials and Applications, American Institute of manufacturing in liquid rocket engines, Acta Astronaut.
174 (2020), https://doi.
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., Reston ,VA, 2018, https://doi.org/10.2514/ org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.04.067.
4.104893.
[8] T.M.
Smith, A.C. Thompson, T.P.
Gabb, C.L.
Bowman, C.A.
Kantzos, Efficient [3] P. Gradl, D. Tinker, A.
Park, O. Mireles, M. Garcia, R. Wilkerson, et al., Robust production of a high-performance dispersion strengthened, multi-principal element metal additive manufacturing process selection and development for aerospace alloy, Sci Reports 2020 10 (101) (2020) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- components, J.
Mater.
Eng.
Perform.
(2021), https://doi.org/10.1007/s11665- 020-66436-5.
022-06850-0.
Springer.
[9] National Research Council (U.S, Committee on Integrated Computational Materials [4] Paul R. Gradl, Omar R. Mireles, Christopher S. Protz, Chance P. Garcia, Metal Engineering.
Integrated Computational Materials Engineering : a Transformational Additive Manufacturing for Propulsion Applications, first ed., American Institute of Discipline for Improved Competitiveness and National Security, 2008, p. 137.
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., Reston, VA, 2022 https://doi.org/10.2514/ [10] M. Seifi, A. Salem, J. Beuth, O. Harrysson, J.J. Lewandowski, Overview of 4.106279. materials qualification needs for metal additive manufacturing, J. Occup.
Med.
68 [5] P.R.
Gradl, S.E.
Greene, C. Protz, B. Bullard, J. Buzzell, C. Garcia, et al., Additive (2016) 747–764, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-015-1810-0.
manufacturing of liquid rocket engine combustion devices: a summary of process [11] Song Q. song, Y. Zhang, Wei Y. feng, Zhou X. yi, Shen Y. fu, Y min Zhou, et al., developments and hot-fire testing results, in: 2018 Jt.
Propuls.
Conf., American Microstructure and mechanical performance of ODS superalloys manufactured by P. Gradl et al.
A c t a A s t r o n a u t i c a 211(2023)483–497 selective laser melting, Opt Laser.
Technol.
144 (2021), 107423, https://doi.org/ [30] T.W.
Teasley, T.M.
Fedotowsky, P.R.
Gradl, B.L.
Austin, S.D.
Heister, Current state 10.1016/j.optlastec.2021.107423.
of engine development, AIAA Scitech [12] F. Kerstens, A. Cervone, P. Gradl, End to end process evaluation for additively 2023 (2023) 1–24, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2023-1873.
AIAA.
manufactured liquid rocket engine thrust chambers, Acta Astronaut.
182 (2021) [31] C. Katsarelis, P. Chen, P.R.
Gradl, C. Protz, Z. Jones, N. Marshall, et al., Additive 454–465, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2021.02.034.
manufacturing of component [13] R.P.
Minneci, E.A.
Lass, J.R. Bunn, H. Choo, C.J.
Rawn, Copper-based alloys for applications, JANNAF Jt Propuls Conf (2019).
https://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?
structural high-heat-flux applications: a review of development, properties, and R=20200001007.
performance of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb alloys, Int.
Mater.
Rev.
(2020), https://doi.org/ [32] P.S.
Chen, C.C.
Katsarelis, W.M.
Medders, P.R.
Gradl, Segregation Evolution and 10.1080/09506608.2020.1821485.
Diffusion of Titanium in Directed Energy Deposited, gen embrittlement.
s.nasa.gov/citations/20210013649.
2016–218602, https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20160005654.
Protz, C. Katsarelis, P. Chen, Process development 2016–218602.
and hot-fire testing of additively manufactured i, S.J.
Zinkle, Physical and mechanical properties of copper and copper alloys, applications, AIAA Propuls.
Energy 2021 (2021) 1–23, https://doi.org/10.2514/ Compr Nucl Mater 4 (2012) 667–690, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08- 6.2021-3236.
056033-5.00122-1.
[34] P.-S. Chen, M. Mitchell, Aerospace Structural Metals Handbook Alloy Loewenthal, Comparison of GRCop-84 to other Cu Nickel Base Alloys-Ni, 2005. alloys with high thermal conductivities, J.
Mater.
Eng.
Perform.
17 (2008) [35] P.S.
Chen, C.C.
Katsarelis, W.M.
Medders, P.R.
Gradl, C.H.
Su, Development of 594–606, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11665-007-9175-3.
directed energy deposited rocket [17] P.R.
Gradl, C. Protz, K. Cooper, C. Garcia, D. Ellis, L. Evans, GRCop-42 engine applications, asa.gov development and hot-fire testing using additive manufacturing powder bed fusion (2023).
for channel-cooled combustion chambers, AIAA Propuls.
Energy Forum Expo 2019 [36] A. Soltani-tehrani, P. Chen, C. Katsarelis, P. Gradl, S. Shao, Thin-Walled Structures (2019), https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2019-4228.
American Institute of Aeronautics Mechanical properties of laser powder directed energy deposited lloy : effects of powder reuse and part orientation, Thin-Walled Struct.
185 [18] J. Svoboda, V. Horník, L. Stratil, H. Hadraba, B. Maˇsek, O. Khalaj, et al., (2023), 110636, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tws.2023.110636.
Microstructure evolution in ods alloys with a high-volume fraction of nano oxides, [37] P. Gradl, A. Cervone, P. Colonna, Integral Channel nozzles and heat exchangers Metals 8 (2018), https://doi.org/10.3390/met8121079.
using additive manufacturing directed energy deposition H. Holzbrecher, K.G.
Briefs, H. Beske, Differences in Growth Int.
Astronaut.
Congr., Paris, France 2 (2022), x73690.
IAC-22,C4.
Mechanisms of Oxide Scales Formed on ODS and Conventional Wrought Alloys, [38] Y. Brif, M. Thomas, I. Todd, The use of high-entropy alloys in additive vol.
32, 1989. manufacturing, Scripta Mater.
99 (2015) 93–96, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
[20] T.M.
Smith, C.A.
Kantzos, N.A.
Zarkevich, B.J.
Harder, M. Heczko, P.R.
Gradl, et scriptamat.2014.11.037.
al., A 3D printable alloy designed for extreme environments, Nature (2023), [39] S. Chen, Y. Tong, P.K.
Liaw, Additive manufacturing of high-entropy alloys: a https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-05893-0.
review, Entropy 20 (2018), https://doi.org/10.3390/e20120937.
[21] J. Wadsworth, T.G.
Nieh, J.J. Stephens, Recent advances in aerospace refractory [40] F. Weng, Y. Chew, Z. Zhu, X. Yao, L. Wang, F.L.
Ng, et al., Excellent combination of metal alloys 33 (2013) 131, https://doi.org/10.1179/IMR.1988.33.1.131, 50. strength and ductility of CoCrNi medium entropy alloy fabricated by laser aided [22] P.R.
Gradl, S. Elam Greene, C.S.
Protz, D.L.
Ellis, B.A.
Lerch, S.E.
Greene, et al., additive manufacturing, Addit.
Manuf.
34 (2020), 101202, https://doi.org/ Development and hot-fire testing of additively manufactured copper combustion 10.1016/j.addma.2020.101202.
chambers for liquid rocket engine applications, 53rd AIAA/SAE/ASEE Jt Propuls [41] T.M.
Smith, A.C. Thompson, T.P.
Gabb, C.L.
Bowman, C.A.
Kantzos, Efficient Conf 1–27 (2017), https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2017-4670.
production of a high-performance dispersion element alloy, Sci.
Rep. (2020) 1–9, [23] Ogbuji Lu, D.L.
Humphrey, J.A.
Setlock, Oxidation-reduction resistance of https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-66436-5.
advanced copper alloys August (2003).
[42] T.M.
Smith, Additive Manufactured Alloys for HighTemperature Applications, [24] Ogbuji Lu, D.L.
Humphrey.
Oxidation of Copper Alloy Candidates for Rocket National Space and Missile Materials Symposium, Colorado [43] O. Mireles, Additive manufacture of refractory metals for aerospace applications, Springs, CO, 2002.
AIAA Propuls.
Energy 2020 Forum (2021) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2021- [25] D.L.
Ellis, K. Taminger, C. Protz, J. Fikes, Low-Cost Upper Stage-Class Propulsion 3234.
(LCUSP): Final Report, 2022.
[44] O.R.
Mireles, O. Rodriguez, Y. Gao, N. Philips, Additive Manufacture of Refractory [26] Ellis DL, Loewenthal WS, Yun HM.
Tensile Properties of GRCop-84.
Nasa/Tm- Alloy C103 for Propulsion Applications.
AIAA Propuls.
Energy 2020 Forum, 2012-217108 2012.
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA, 2020, pp.
1–13, [27] T.W.
Teasley, g Detonation Rocket https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2020-3500.
Engine for New US Space Flight Capability, 2022.
[45] A. Talignani, R. Seede, A. Whitt, S. Zheng, J. Ye, I. Karaman, et al., A review on [28] P.R.
Gradl, T.W.
Teasley, C.S.
Protz, M.B.
Garcia, D. Ellis, C. Kantzos, Advancing additive manufacturing of refractory tungsten and tungsten alloys, Addit.
Manuf.
GRCop-based bimetallic additive manufacturing to optimize component design and 58 (2022), 103009, https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ADDMA.2022.103009.
applications for liquid rocket engines, AIAA Propuls.
Energy 2021 (2021) 1–28, [46] P.D.
Awasthi, P. Agrawal, R.S.
Haridas, R.S.
Mishra, M.T.
Stawovy, S. Ohm, et al., https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2021-3231.
Mechanical properties and microstructural characteristics of additively [29] T. Teasley, B. Williams, A. Larkey, C. Protz, P. Gradl, A review towards the design manufactured C103 niobium alloy, Mater.
Sci.
Eng., A 831 (2022), 142183, optimization of high-performance additively manufactured rotating detonation https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MSEA.2021.142183.
rocket engine injectors, AIAA Propuls Energy Forum (2021 2021), https://doi.org/ [47] C.J.
Romnes, J.F.
Stubbins, O.R.
Mireles, Tuning the properties of additively 10.2514/6.2021-3655.
manufactured tungsten ultra-fine lattices by adjusting laser energy density and lattice geometry, J.
Mater.
Eng.
Perform.
(2022 2022) 1–14, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/S11665-022-07126-3.
497