International Materials Reviews ISSN: 0950-6608 (Print) 1743-2804 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/yimr20 Copper-based alloys for structural high-heat-flux applications: a review of development, properties, and performance of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb alloys Robert P. Minneci, Eric A. Lass, Jeffrey R. Bunn, Hahn Choo & Claudia J. Rawn To cite this article: Robert P. Minneci, Eric A. Lass, Jeffrey R. Bunn, Hahn Choo & Claudia J. Rawn (2021) Copper-based alloys for structural high-heat-flux applications: a review of development, properties, and performance of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb alloys, International Materials Reviews, 66:6, 394-425, DOI: 10.1080/09506608.2020.1821485 To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09506608.2020.1821485 © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group Published online: 08 Oct 2020. Submit your article to this journal Article views: 10147 View related articles View Crossmark data Citing articles: 3 View citing articles Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yimr20 INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 2021,VOL.66,NO.6,394–425 https://doi.org/10.1080/09506608.2020.1821485 Copper-based alloys for structural high-heat-flux applications: a review of development, properties, and performance of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb alloys Robert P. Minneci a, Eric A. Lass a, Jeffrey R. Bunn b, Hahn Chooa and Claudia J. Rawn a aMaterialsScienceandEngineeringDepartment,TheUniversityofTennessee,Knoxville,TN,USA;bNeutronScatteringDivision,OakRidge NationalLaboratory,OakRidge,TN,USA ABSTRACT ARTICLEHISTORY ThisreviewexaminesthedevelopmentandcurrentstateofCu-richCu–Cr–Nballoyscommonly Received28May2020 referredtoasGRCoporGlennResearchcopperalloyswithemphasisonCu–8Cr–4Nb(at%),or Accepted2September2020 GRCop-84, and Cu–4Cr–2Nb, or GRCop-42. Recent additive manufacturing efforts have KEYWORDS increased interest in GRCop alloys, and full-scale hardware has been fabricated using AM techniques and practical hot-fire tests have been conducted, but structure–property High-heat-flux;additive manufacturing;powder relationships are still under development. The development, processing, and current metallurgy;combustion microstructure-property relationships of GRCop alloys are reviewed along with comparisons chamberliner;precipitation to similar high-heat-flux Cu alloys including NARloy-Z, GlidCop Al-15, AMZIRC, Cu–1Cr–0.1Zr, hardening;dispersion andCu–0.9Cr.ThereviewconcludeswithanassessmentoffutureprospectsforGRCopalloys strengthening;thermal andoverviewofadvantagesprovidedbyadditivemanufacturing. conductivity;low-cycle thermalfatigue;creep Introduction transfer media due to its relative cost, formability, Excessive heat flux from or onto surfaces has been a and conductivity, and numerous alloys with a variety major limiting factor in the development of various of elements have been used to fulfil various roles in technologies such as turbines, rockets, or electronics industry. One of these alloys is Cu–8Cr–4Nb (at%) or [1]. The term ‘high-heat-flux applications’ is used to GRCop-84 (Glenn Research Copper alloy 84) which describe these and similar uses where the heat flux is wasformulatedforgh and difficult to manage and has (SSME)foracomponentwithheatfluxontheorderof beenascribedtoamultitudeofapplicationsfromweld- 100MWm −2butwasnotputintoserviceduetolarge ing equipment to fusion reactor components [1–4]. time and monetary investments in its predecessor, Defining a range for high-heat-flux is difficult since NARloy-Z. The term ‘GRCop-84’ will be used to its perception has evolved with time and differs specificallydenoteCu–8Cr–4NbandGRCopwillclas- betweendifferentfieldsandindustries.Mostengineer- sifysimilarlyCu-richCu–Cr–NballoyslikeGRCop-42, ingdisciplinesconsider>1MWm −2ashigh-heat-flux although the focus will be on GRCop-84 which has [5]. In the realm of microprocessor cooling for more available literature. GRCop-84’s creep, conduc- example, Ebadian et al. classify 1–10 MW m −2 as tivity, low cycle fatigue, tensile strength, and thermal high-heat-flux and denote 10–100 MW m −2 as ‘ultra- expansion properties are among the best available at high-heat-flux’ and >100 MW m −2 as ‘extreme-heat- high temperatures up to approximately 973K [2]. flux’ [5]. However, these terms are rarely used outside GRCop-84 has shown potential for numerous high- ofthemicroprocessorfield,sothetermhigh-heat-flux heat-flux applications including resistance welding will primarily be used broadly here to encompass electrodes and holders, permanent metal casting everything above 1 MW m −2. For reference, a typical moulds, vacuum plasma spray nozzles, fusion reactor burning room during a house fire releases heat flux first walls, or any high temperature heat exchanger in on the range of 0.001–0.01 MW m −2, while the maxi- thepast,butrecentadvancesinadditivemanufacturing mum allowed heat flux in a fission reactor is roughly (also known as 3D printing) and metallurgy have 1 MW m −2 in the fuel cladding which is 1% of the extended its utility [2,8,9]. While this has renewed heat flux at the surface of the sun [6,7]. One method interestinGRCop-84,themajorityofthedevelopment ofmitigatingexcessiveheatfluxistouseahighthermal of the alloy remains in technical documents and older conductivitymaterialtorapidlytransferheatbyactive papers that are overshadowed by more recent publi- or passive cooling. Copper is a standard for heat cations.GRCop-84hasbecomeanintrinsiccomponent CONTACT ClaudiaJ.Rawn crawn@utk.edu MaterialsScienceandEngineeringDepartment,TheUniversityofTennessee,Knoxville,TN,USA ©2020TheAuthor(s).PublishedbyInformaUKLimited,tradingasTaylor&FrancisGroup ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivativesLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc-nd/4.0/),whichpermitsnon-commercialre-use,distribution,andreproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycited,andisnotaltered,transformed,or builtuponinanyway. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 395 to superalloycanbeusedinstead.Thepressuregenerated Upper Stage Propulsion (LCUSP) project and Rapid bythecombustionreactionismostlynegatedbymech- Analysis and Manufacturing Propulsion Technology anicalsupportprovidedbyanexternaljacketofIN718, (RAMPT) and full-scale, quality tested hardware has buttherigidreinforcementdoesnotaidinreducingthe been developed [10–12]. The objective of this review high thermal strains [16,17]. is to provide the context of GRCop-84 from the per- Regenerativecoolingwasachievedbyflowingliquid spectiveoftheSpaceShuttledevelopmentandrelevant H through rectangular cooling channels machined properties and scientific theory to help facilitate its into the liner that also functioned as the path to the continued development and application. fuel injectors, see Figure 2. These channels were machinedbymillingintotheedgesofthelinerinarec- tangularconfigurationparalleltothelengthwithasub- Background sequently added shell to enclose the channels with a Followingthehistoricmoonlandingin1969duringthe close-out by electro-forming, or a similar process Apollo project, the largest arguable obstacle to further [18,19]. Due to the complicated geometry of the human operated space exploration and development liner, this was likely the most reliable method to add was its high cost. Concepts from as early as the 1950s cooling channels at the time despite high machining advocatedtheuseofreusablelaunchvehiclesforredu- costs and limited tolerances. Forming a combustion cingcostbutwere nottechnologicallyviable[13]. The chamber in a single piece with built-in cooling chan- majority of the necessary developments in technology nels without the need for machining would likely were made during the Apollo project and led to the improve cooling rates, overall reliability, and cost eventual approval of the Space Shuttle program in efficiency but was effectively impossible at the time. 1972 [13]. The primary goal of the Space Shuttle was Higher machining tolerances or built-in channels to provide a consistent and reliable mode of transpor- would allow for overall improvements to the design tationforthepartsandcrewtotheInternationalSpace geometry such as the aspect ratio, number, and pos- Stationwithhighpayloadandsafetyrequirements.The ition of the channels [18]. Future computer analysis finaldesignoftheSpaceShuttleconsistedoftheOrbi- and fabrication methods would eventually be found terVehiclewhichheldthecrewandcargo,expendable and used to optimise the channels to some extent tanks of liquid hydrogen and oxygen, and a pair of [18]. Under the high active-cooling gradient between recoverable solid rocket boosters. Entry into orbit the heat of combustion and liquid hydrogen, respect- could be achieved by combining the thrust from the ively,atypicalrocketenginelinerwillhaveanoperat- solid rocket boosters and Orbiter Vehicle’s engines, ing temperature, often referred to as a ‘hot-wall’ but emperature, ranging from 673 to 973K depending would not be sufficient to meet the weight and safety on cooling efficiency from thickness and conductivity requirements[13].Asaresult,adevelopmentcontract of the channel walls [2]. This hot-wall temperature was awarded to Rocketdyne in 1971 to develop a new range could be endured by a variety of materials, but enginethatwouldeventuallybecometheRS-25engine ould orSpaceShuttleMainEngine(SSME),whichisshown provetobethemostdifficulttomeet:theSSMEneeded in its relative position to the Space Shuttle in Figure 1 to be reusable with limited repair and re-conditioning [13,14]. to reduce cost. Even if a material could initially meet AkeycomponentoftheSSMEwasanewhigh-per- initial property requirements set by esign that raised the ance considerations of creep, low-cycle fatigue (LCF), throat heat flux of previous designs from 32 MW and other time dependent mechanisms dramatically m −2 (20 Btu in −2 s −1) to 114–164 MW m −2 (100 Btu increased the design challenge. in −2 s −1), which could accommodate the increased A new alloy was needed to fulfil these conditions payloadrequirements[15,16].TheSSME’scombustion and Rocketdyne developed a copper alloy based on chamber contains the combustion reaction of propel- their previous work with NARloy-A, a cast Cu-3.5Ag lants and generates thrust through supersonic expan- (wt-%) alloy, by adding Zr to a ratio of Cu–3Ag–0.5 sion in the throat that is passed out the nozzle; these Zr(wt-%)andvacuummeltingandvacuumcentrifug- essential components are shown in Figure 2 [17]. The ally casting [16]. Copper was the base material due to combustion chamber was predicted to have operating its ability to function as a structural material along conditionsof3600Kand∼20MPa,thoughthesepre- with its balance of cost, thermal conductivity, and dicted values vary between sources, and required mechanicalstrength.Cu–3Ag–0.5Zrwastrademarked regenerative cooling and a high thermal conductivity NARloy-Zandformedintocombustionchamberliners structural liner to dissipate heat and resist thermal by a combination of hot spun forging and machining strain [15,17]. The temperature environment of the by Rocketdyne [16]. After the original production, nozzleissignificantlylower,soalowercost,fromafab- the equipment was dismantled, and ctive, steel alloy or reproduce a chemically equivalent version of the alloy 396 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Figure1.GeneralSpaceShuttleoutlineandinsetofdiagramoftheRS-25SSMEadaptedfrom[1]. with conventional melting, casting, and forging meeting the original standards of the SSME. Their methods, designated as a reusable copper alloy that were needed [16]. Other groups have had similar suc- would be thermally and mechanically stable during cessincludingKrishnaetal.whoreproducedasimilar operationasacombustionchamberlinerwithprimary Cu–Ag–Zralloywithacombinationofvacuuminduc- criteria of mechanical strengthening, thermal conduc- tionmelting,hotforging,androlling[20].AMZIRC,a tivity, thermal expansion, creep, fatigue, and environ- Cu–Zr alloy, was the primary competitor at the time mental resistance. Relevant theory and background for fatigue resistance, but NARloy-Z demonstrated forthesecriteriawillbediscussedtohighlightthechal- longerandmoreuniformcyclelifetimesunderrealistic lengeanddifferencesinperformancebetweenalloysin thrustchamberconditions[16].Despitebeingthebest high-heat-flux applications. available alloy, NARloy-Z was not able to fully meet reusability specifications and reusability life require- ments were reduced from 100 missions in 1973 to 55 Structurepropertycorrelationsofhigh-heat- in 1980 [17,21]. flux copper alloys Regardlessofitslimitations,NARloy-Zwasusedin High-heat-flux Cu alloying each space shuttleengine until the last launch in 2011 with roughly 40 years of development and investment Copper’smechanicalstrengthcanreadilybeimproved focused on ensuring the reliability of the NARloy-Z through combinations of alloying, work hardening, engines. Replacing a critical component like the liner and heat treatments, but the viable choices are con- requires thorough testing and evaluation over many siderably reduced at high temperatures. Most metals, years, even though relatively small improvements including copper, become mechanically unstable and from a new alloy could be economically worthwhile exhibit decreased mechanical properties at elevated by improving load capacity or safety margins [22]. temperatures. An alloy chosen for high temperature AlthoughNARloy-Zremainedinservice,itwaslimited applications requires strong resistance to microstruc- byitsmaximumoperatingtemperatureandreusability, tural evolution in addition to mechanical strengthen- leaving an opportunity for the development of a more ing. Solid solution strengthening (SSS), precipitation optimised replacement. nhardening(DH),mechan- researchers were investigating new alloys capable of ical alloying, and oxide dispersion strengthening INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 397 Figure2.SketchofessentialcomponentsofSSMEcombustionchamberandnozzlewithoutinjectordemonstratingpathofcooling chambersbuiltparalleltoheightofthenozzle;nottoscale. (ODS)areallcommonlyusedtointroduceavarietyof and have limited solubility in Cu. However, both secondary phases in copper, although their efficacy at elements do form intermetallic phases with Cu that high temperatures can vary. State-of-the-art copper could be used as precipitation or dispersion strength- alloys are compared in terms of composition and ening particles. strengtheningmechanismsinTables1and2.Solidsol- Precipitation hardening, also called age hardening, ution strengthened alloys are the result of soluble is the result of a secondary heat treatment after initial elementaladditionsineithersubstitutionalor intersti- fabricationwhere secondphase particlesform, or pre- tialatomicpositionswithinthesolventmetal.Forhigh cipitate,withintheprimarymatrixphase.Precipitation substitutionalsolubility, thetwo elementsshouldhave hardened alloys require a matrix-phase solubility that the same crystal structure and similar atomic radii, decreases with decreasing temperature [23,24]. while interstitial solubility requires the atomic radii of Quenching from an elevated temperature, followed the solute atom be sufficiently smaller than the base byaging,causessupersaturationofsoluteandsecond- element (<15%). In both cases, the elements’ valences ary-phase precipitation, respectively. The amount of and electronegativities should be similar to help with secondary-phase precipitation is proportional to the bonding. Comparing the alloying elements of NAR- concentration of solute in supersaturation and the loy-Z and GRCop-84 to Cu provided in Table 3, only solubility at the aging temperature [24]. Precipitation Ag has the same crystal structure (FCC) as Cu, and occurs because of the materials tendency to reduce hassignificantsolidsolutionsolubilityinCu;although free energy, and most often the precipitates nucleate it’s slightly larger atomic radius limits its solubility in at defects, such as dislocations or grain boundaries, as Cu to about 4.9 at%. Cr is similar in size to Ag, but spherical particles (low surface area to volume, mini- has a different crystal structure (BCC), and therefore mising interfacial energy) [23–25]. has limited solubility in Cu. Nb and Zr have both The Ag in NARloy-Z contributes both SSS in the different atomic radii and different crystal structures, matrix and PH by forming various reported Table1.PrimarycompositionofCualloysbywt-%[at%];additionalintentionalorimpurityelementsmaybepresentdependingon thequalityoftherawmaterialsandprocessing,andexactvaluesofelementscanvary;unitednumberingsystem(UNS)identifier providedwhenavailable;adaptedpartiallyfrom[1];roundedtofirstdecimalwhencalculated. Alloy UNS Ag Al Cr Cu Nb O Zr NARloy-Z 3.0[1.79] – – 96.5[97.86] – – 0.5[0.35] AMZIRC C15000 – – – 99.85[99.9] – – 0.15[0.10] GlidCopAL-15 C15715 – 0.15[0.08] – 99.68[99.8] – 0.17[0.12] – GRCop-84* – – 6.2–6.8[7.6–8.3] 88.4–87.2[87.3–88.69] 5.4–6[3.7–4.1] – – GRCop-42* – – 3.1–3.4[3.8–4.2] 94.2–93.6[94.4–93.8] 2.7–3[1.8–2.1] – – CuCrZr-IG+ – – 0.6–0.9[0.73–1.10] Balance – – 0.07–0.15[0.05–0.10] *GRCop-84andGRCop-42basedonpowderchemistryfrom[2]. +CuCrZr-IGrepresentsITERgradeCu–Cr–Zr,adaptedfrom[1]. 398 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Table2.ComparisonofhightemperatureCualloys’generalcomposition,strengtheningmechanisms,secondaryphases,particle descriptionswithkeyreferences;CWindicatescoldworkisoptionalbutcommon. Alloy Strengthening Secondary name Composition mechanism(s) phase(s) Particledescription Ref. NARloy-Z Cu–Ag–Zr PH,SSS,&CW Ag,CuZr* ZrserveasoxygentrapsatgrainboundariesbyformingoxideswhichpreventsCu [1,2] x oxideformationandpromoteshomogenousprecipitation,whileintermetallic Cu–Zrphasesformthatcanpingrainboundariesandslowgrainboundary growth;Ag’sroleisprimarilystrengthening:afteraging,semi-coherentAg nanocrystallineprecipitatesformthatstrengthenthematrixbypinningtheCu matrixgrainboundariesandslowinggrainboundarygrowth;above866KAg precipitatescoarseninthematrixbecomingincoherentanddegradingmaterial strength AMZIRC Cu–Zr PH&CW CuZr* Approximately80%ofstrengtheningfromCWratherthanparticlestrengthening; [3] x aginghaslimitedeffect;strengthretainedupto773K;Zrprovidesbenefits similartoNARloy-Z,andintermetallicsformasrelativelylargeμm-sized precipitates GlidCop Cu–AlO DH AlO Finelydispersed,nanometeroxideparticlesinsidegrainsoratgrainboundaries [4] 2 3 2 3 providemostofGlidCop’sstrengthening,thoughCWcanbeusedtoenhance mechanicalperformance;aluminapreventsrecrystallisationandsofteningat elevatedtemperatures;notedasimmunetocoarsening GRCop Cu–Cr–Nb PH&DH Cr,CrNb(C15) SlightexcessofCrsuppressesdetrimentalNbformation;canbeCWbut [5,6] strengtheningisnotdependentonit;CrNbisresistanttocoarseningathigh temperatures,pinstheCumatrixgrainboundaries,andslowsgrainboundary growth.CrNbformsbimodaldistributionwithμmandnano-scaleparticlesthat refinethematrixandprovidestrengtheningrespectively CuCrZr-IG Cu–Cr–Zr PH Cr,CuZr* CanbeusedinagedconditionafterCWtomaximisemechanicalproperties; [4,7– x providessimilarZrbenefitsdescribedinNARloy-Z;Crbelievedtoprecipitatefrom 9] thematrixandintermetallicLavesCrZrarepossiblebutnotobserved; susceptibletoover-agingandrecrystallisationathightemperatures;Cralso preventsgraingrowthfollowingrecrystallisation intermetallicphaseswithCuandZr[20,26].TheZr,in mechanism,sothedominantmechanismisoftencon- addition to contributing to Ag’s intermetallic phases, sidered for classification. DH alloys are not limited by can add SSS or form Cu Zr or Cu Zr precipitates or solubility like PH alloys and a variety of ceramic par- 4 5 oxides depending on the processing methods [26,27]. ticles and intermetallic compounds can be readily Singh et al. asserted that Zr in solid solution should introduced into a metal matrix by a variety of tech- contribute considerably to observations of higher niques, including mixing incoherent particles with an microstructural and thermal stability and non-equili- alloymelt,internaloxidation,precipitationbyachemi- briumconditionsintroducedbyrapidmeltingandsoli- cal reaction, mechanical alloying, and rapid solidifica- dification extending the solid solubility of Zr [27]. tion [23]. Dispersion hardening is distinguished from PH in The lattice correspondence between particle and that the second phase particles do not form via solid- matrix results in a greater increase in strength from state phase transformation in the matrix. Instead, DH PH compared to DH [23]. However, PH is limited to particles can be directly added to a liquid metal (i.e. alloy systems with the appropriate phase equilibria oxide or carbide particles), or can be formed in the conditions and are limited in maximum temperature melt before solidification. The other major difference capability by the solvus temperature of the precipitate between dispersion and precipitation strengthening is phase at which the precipitate dissolves. PH alloys are the particle/matrix interface. Precipitation hardening further limited by diffusive coarsening of the precipi- second phase particles typically have an orientation tate particles at temperature well below the solvus relationship with the matrix phase, are often fully or temperature. These limitations leave DH as the only partially coherent (matching of the atomic lattice particle strengthening mechanism available for many planes across the interface) [23]. Dispersoids typically alloy systems. have no lattice correspondence between matrix and particle [23]. Specifics of strengthening mechanisms DHcanbedifficulttodistinguishfromPHbecause their secondary phases have similar particles and SoluteatomsgenerallyprovideSSSbyimpedingdislo- strengtheningmechanisms.Complicatingmatters,pre- cation motion. More specifically, solute atoms locally cipitate particles have been referred to as dispersions distort the matrix lattice structure which provides a based on size or distribution in a matrix, but precipi- strain field around the solute atom. The solute strain tatesspecificallyrefertoparticlesthatcomeoutofsol- fieldinteracts withand impedesthestrainfieldof dis- ution from additional heat treatments. DH alloys can locationsbyprovidingafrictionalresistanceforce.The bealsobedistinguishedfromPHbymechanicalbeha- strengthofthefieldisdependentonavarietyoffactors viourssuchascreepcharacteristics.However,itisrare such as shear modulus, concentration, or relative size to find an alloy with only one form of strengthening ofthesoluteatom.SSSislimitedbythesolidsolubility INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 399 Table3.CharacteristicsofselectmetalsandmaximumsolidsolubilityinCufromtheindicatedreferences. Meltingtemperature ApproximatemaximumsolubilityinCu Purethermalconductivity0–100°C(W Atomicradii Crystal Element (K) (wt-%[at%]) m−1K−1)[1] (Å) lattice Ag 1234 8.04[4.9][2] 425 1.65 FCC Cr 2180 0.73[0.89][3] 91.3 1.66 BCC Cu 1358 – 397 1.45 FCC Nb 2750 1.31[0.9][4] 54.1 1.98 BCC Zr 2128 0.17[0.12][5] 22.6 2.06 HCP of the strengthening phases, and excess will form sec- The Orowan–Ashby equation for a random distri- ondary phases. Typically, SSS alloys are made inten- bution of impenetrable particles goes by the form tionally with excess solute to ensure that maximum 0.84MGb r solubility,andthereforestrengthening,isreached[28]. Ds= ln (3) ParticlesinalloysfromDHorPHgenerallyprovide 2p(1−y)0.5(lPD −2r) b strengtheningbyhinderingdislocationmotion,similar which takes additional factors into account including to SSS, either by the dislocation shearing through the thePoisson’sratioofthematrix,υ,andtheTaylorfac- particle or by bypassing it (Orowan strengthening or tor,M,whichisroughly3forfacecentredcubic(FCC) bowing). There are six properties of particles that metals [29]. The linear mean free path term, lLD, affect shear including coherency strains, stacking- changes to the mean planar particle spacing, l in PD fault energy, ordered structure, modulus effect, inter- Equation (3), calculated by facialenergyandmorphology,andlatticefrictionstress (cid:1) (cid:3) [ fl u x ]. C M u o a s ll t o s y t s re a n re gt i h n e c n oh in e g re p n a t r o ti r c m les uc fo h u s n tr d o i n n ge h r ig th h a -h n e t a h t e - lPD =r 2 p f 0.5 (4) Cu-matrix (i.e. resistant to particle shear), so Orowan ThisderivationoftheOrowan–Ashbyequationpro- strengthening is the primary precipitate/dispersoid videsabetterestimateofparticlestrengtheningthatthe strengthening mechanism [23]. shearresistant particles in PH and DH willprovide to Orowan strengthening relates to direct dislocation the matrix. However, there are also a variety of other interactions with discrete particles in a matrix. The mechanisms that might be active depending on alloy original derivation of Orowan strengthening has been composition. adjusted to account for estimates of the dislocation The strengthening contribution from matrix grain line tension, mean free path, corrections of the inter- size is described by the Hall–Petch mechanism, given action between dislocation segments on either side of in Equation (5) a particle, type of dispersion, or particle type leading to many forms of the Orowan equation [23]. Most of s=s 0 +k y d−0.5 (5) these equations are semi-empirical and serve as esti- mates of strengthening for comparing similar alloys. where d is a measured average grain size, k y is a As an example, the Orowan-Ashby equation for oxide material constant for the ease of slip transfer and s 0 dispersionstrengthening is shownin Equation (1) is yield or friction stress of a single crystal, 0.16MPa m −1/2 and 26MPa for pure copper, respectively [30]. Ds= 0.13Gb ln r (1) Using these constants, the strength for Cu with an lLD b average grain size of 1cm, 1mm, 1 μm, and 100nm isapproximately27.6,31.1,186,and532MPa,respect- whereDsrepresentstheincreaseinstrengthofthebulk ively. At 1cm there is effectively no strengthening alloy,Gistheshearmodulusofthematrix,bistheBur- aboves and considerable strengthening at 1 μm and gersvectorofthelattice,ristheaverageparticleradius, 0 100nm. Hall-Petch strengthening is possible because and lLD is the linear mean free path of dislocations grain boundaries, like solute atoms and second phase between the particles [23]. The mean free path can be particles, act as glide dislocation barriers. Smaller describedinmanyways,butasimpleexpressionispro- grains require that dislocations are positioned closer vided in Equation(2) together,andtheinteractionofthestressfieldsassoci- 4(1−f)r ated with the dislocations themselves further impede lLD = 3f (2) their motion [29]. At equilibrium, the driving forces for coarsening are prevented or balanced by various wherefisthevolumefractionofparticlesassumedtobe pinningforceslikeHall-PetchandOrowanstrengthen- spheres with radius r [23]. A high volume fraction of ing,butasthetemperatureincreases,thedrivingforce small particles should minimise the mean free path for coarsening will eventually overcome the pinning andprovidethehighestdegreeofOrowanstrengthening forces. Additionally, small matrix grains are typically due to the mean free path’s inversely proportional thermallyunstable.Forexample,nano-crystallinecop- relationshipshown in Equation(1). per has good Hall-Petch strengthening at room 400 R.P.MINNECIETAL. temperature, but its surface energy is high, and the allowsforthecalculationoftheaverageprecipitatesize grainsarelikelytogrow,orcoarsen,asthetemperature where r is the average precipitate radius at the end of is increased to reduce the surface energy and driving the growth stage, r 0 is the initial precipitate radius D B force for grain growth. Precipitates and dispersions is the diffusivity of the solute in the matrix, and t is canindirectlyaidHall-Petchstrengtheningbyinhibit- time [9,33]. The particular LSW derivation, given in ing grain boundary motion, preventing matrix grains Equation (7), has the benefit of including diffusivity from coarsening. However, the initial matrix grain which can be used as a qualitative means of assessing size must be small, which can readily be achieved the coarsening kinetics. Precipitates consisting of through rapid solidification techniques. elements with low diffusivity will help decrease coar- Rapidsolidificationbroadlydescribesmethodswith sening, and precipitate elements with larger atomic coolingratesontheorderof102–1012Ks −1thatform radii than the matrix atoms generally have slower unique microstructures with non-equilibrium phases diffusion. and structures [9,31]. Rapid solidification is often used to produce fine matrix grains and particles, but Conductivity these have inherently high interfacial area, and conse- quently a large interfacial energy contribution to the Strengtheningcoppercanbereadilyachievedbyaddinga total free energy and will readily grow unless they secondaryphaseorsolute,butifthermalconductivityisa form in a stable configuration or are resistant to coar- criticaldesignproperty,suchasthecasewiththeSSME sening. Rapid solidification’s high cooling rates typi- combustion chamber liner or high-heat-flux appli- cally prevents time-dependent particle or grain cations,thealloychoicebecomessignificantlymorecom- growth, so the microstructure is often more hom- plex. The principles of conductivity in metals will be ogenous than other methods which can help prevent discussed tohelpunderstand alloychoice andrelation- particle coarsening. shipsbetweenthermalandelectricalconductivity. Particles of different radii have differences in free Thermal energy is often attributed to atomic energyarisingfromcapillarityeffects,providingadriv- vibration in a given material, but a solid’s vibration ing force for particle coarsening, known as Ostwald can further be defined by quantum mechanics as a ripening, which tends to decrease the free energy of wave carrying vibrational energy between the lattice the system by forming a more homogeneous distri- or a phonon [34]. All crystalline materials conduct butionoflargerparticles[9,32].Thefreeenergygradi- thermal energy through phonon interactions such as ent between two particles, including grains, driving latticeorphononthermalconductivity,kp,butphonon coarsening can be expressed as interactions contribute nearly all of non-metals ther- (cid:1) (cid:3) m p =2g s V r 1 − r 1 = k B T C DC B (6) m lat a t l ic c e o , n s d o uc t t h i e vit m y o [3 re 5]. de P f h e o ct n - o fr n e s e a t r h e e d s e t p r e u n c d tu e r n e t o is n , t t h h e e 1 2 B higher the thermal conductivity. Researchers like wherem represents the difference in chemical poten- Groza and Gibeling stress matrix purity as essential p tial, V is the atomic volume, r and r are the radii of for high-heat-flux applications for this reason [36]. 1 2 twoparticles,k B isBoltzmann’sconstant,g s isthesur- Oneofmetals’uniquequalitiesisthepresenceoffree face energy of the precipitates, DC B is the solute con- conductionelectrons that readily transfer and serve as centration gradient between the particles, and C B is pointchargeentitiesforchargeandheatwhichcollec- the average concentration of solute in the matrix tively contribute to electronic thermal conductivity, [32]. While intended for comparing particles, this kel, in addition to phonon thermal conductivity, kp effect can largely be ignored because the inverse [35].TheSommerfeldmodeltreatstheconductionelec- relationship of both r and r has a larger impact on tronsofmetalsasanelectrongas(orsea)thatobeythe 1 2 the chemical potential than their difference. Unless laws of quantum mechanics and can readily transfer the distribution is unusually homogenous, the smaller betterthanphonons[37].Whilenon-metalsmayhave the particles, the greater the tendency to grow. By some electronic contribution, it is significantly less Equation (6), coarsening could be readily reduced by than metals’ electronic contribution which are overall increasing the precipitate size, r, but this change better conductors [35]. Both phonon and electronic would likely result in an undesirable decrease in the contributionsaretreatedindependentlyandcontribute mechanical strengthening. totheoverallthermalconductivity,k,by refe T r h re e d t L o if a s s h L it i z f – sh Sl i y tz o – z W ov a – g W ne a r g ) n t e h r eor ( y LS p W ro , vid f e o s r a m b er e l t y - k=kel +kp . (8) ter understanding of particle size development as the Theelectronicthermalconductivityisgivenbythefol- following derivation lowing: r3− r 0 3 = D Bg s k B C B T V2t (7) kel = p2 3 n e m k e 2 B V(cid:1) T F lel (9) INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 401 where n e is the number of free electrons per cm3, T is freepath.Phononsareknowntohavethreeinteraction temperature, lel is the mean free path between col- processes: electron–lattice potential scattering known lisions,m e isthemassofanelectron,andV(cid:1) Fistheelec- as Umklapp collisions, scattering by solute atoms and tronvelocityattheFermisurfaceasgiveninEquation defects, and interactions between phonons and free (10) electrons [34]. Electrons have three main interaction processes as well: scattering by solute atoms and (cid:4) (cid:5)1 defects, electron–electron interactions, and electron– V(cid:1) F = 2 m 1F 2 (10) phonon interactions [34]. At low and high tempera- e tures, the lattice contribution to conductivity is low where1F istheFermienergy[34]. due to electron–phonon and Umklapp scattering, Copper, silver, and gold each have a half-filled 4s respectively [34]. In pure metals, the lattice contri- conductionbandthatishighlymobileandpermissible bution is largely ignored except at intermediate temp- to electronic transfer. Since electrical conductivity is a eratures due to dominance of the electronic direct measure of electron transport, this accounts for contribution [34]. This may seem counterintuitive for theirhighconduction.Thermalandelectricalconduc- low temperatures since electron–phonon interactions tivityareintrinsicallylinkedasbotharemeasurements are shared between lattice and electron contributions, oftheeaseoftransportofenergy;thermalconductivity butelectronsmorestronglysuppressthephononcon- is under the influence of a thermal gradient, and elec- tribution than phonons affect the electron contri- trical conductivity is under an applied electric field. bution. Scattering by defects, such as solute atoms or Additionally, the Wiedemann-Franz-Lorenz law, dislocations, has the opposite effect; electrons scatter showninEquation(11),providesarelationofelectrical more in the presence of defects, deceasing lel and conductivity, σ, to thermal conductivity, κ, and temp- their contribution to conductivity [35]. In alloys, the erature, T electronic contribution is still considered dominant; however,thelatticecontributionbecomesmorepreva- k p2 k2 e2 sT =C WFL = 3 B (11) lent over all temperatures. Conductivity interactions betweenalloyedelementsisdependentonmultiplefac- where the remaining term is a constant known as the tors, but usually, the higher the alloying content, the Lorenz number (or Wiedemann-Franz-Lorenz coeffi- lower the conductivity since more defects are present. cient) C commonly approximated to 2.44×10 −8 Partofwhatmakesretainingbothmechanicalstability WFL WΩK −2whereeistheelectroncharge[38].TheLor- andthermalconductivitydifficultisthatbothOrowan enz number is material specific and can vary between strengthening and conductivity are dependent on materials,butthislawiswellobeyedatroomtempera- mean free paths of interaction. While Orowan is ture and above for most pure metals and alloys [38]. based on dislocations and conductivity is based on This relationship can make determining thermal con- electron and phonon scattering, they are correlated. ductivity easier since electrical resistivity, ρ, can be Orowan strengthening prefers a high-volume fraction readily measured and converted to electrical conduc- ofparticlestodecreasethepathlengththatdislocations tivity by the inverse where σ=ρ−1. travel, and the presence of more particles provides Equation (9) predicts the electronic contribution to more potential scattering centres decreasing conduc- thermalconductivitywillincreasewithtemperature,if tivity.Acompromise,dependingonthedesignrequire- mean free path, lel, is ignored. Figure 3 shows the ments, of conductivity and strengthening is necessary. relationship between thermal conductivity and temp- eratureforseveralpuremetalsbetweenroomtempera- Thermal expansion ture and melting. Fe decreases initially but the trend increases at higher temperatures suggesting that the Alloychoiceforahigh-heat-fluxapplicationlikecom- electronic contribution to thermal conductivity even- bustion chamber liners must also consider thermal tually overwhelms the phonon contribution at high expansion alongside mechanical strengthening and temperatures [34]. However, most metals, including conductivity. Thermal expansion in the combustion Cu,experienceaconstantdecreaseinthermalconduc- chamber liner contributes the majority of the stress tivity with increasing temperature. Most of the other and strain by the presence of high thermal gradients terms in Equation (9) are constants, lel would need in the liner’s wall rather than mechanical sources to decrease to account for the loss of conductivity [2,19]. The material’s coefficient of thermal expansion since they are directly proportional. and can be calculated volumetrically using Equation Prediction of phonon and electron interactions are (12) or linearly by exchanging the volumetric terms limited, so the mean free paths of electrons, lel, and for length phonons, lp, provide a qualitative means of assessing DV the thermal conductivity of metals [34]. More scatter- V =avDT (12) ing sites or interactions will result in decreased mean 0 402 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Figure3.Thermalconductivitiesasafunctionoftemperatureofrelevanthigh-heat-fluxsolidpuremetalsinspiredbyasimilarplot fromPoirier[1]usingdatafromTouloukian’sTPRCDataSeries[2]upto1600KwithmarkingsonNbandZrforclarity. where ΔV and V represent the volume change and also called the rib or land, separates the cooling chan- initial state, respectively, and α is the volume coeffi- nels, and the wall separates the channel from the hot v cient of thermal expansion. However, Equation (12)’s side. The close-out chemistry varies depending on the coefficientofthermalexpansionapproximatesthermal fabrication methods, and the thickness of the wall expansion to a linear relationship which will hold for dependsonfabricationlimitations.Thewallseparating most cases, but most materials’ expansion does not the cooling channel and hot side of the liner was holdtoalinearrelationshipwhenateitherexcessively observed gradually deforming without material loss low or high temperatures, such as the hot-wall temp- over operating cycles and eventually rupturing when erature of the combustion chamber liners which is sufficient biaxial ductility was lost [19]. Wall thinning 50–85% of the melting temperature of pure Cu. is a complex failure mode that has been the subject Analysis of the thermal strain and distribution was of debate and has been attributed to different forms conducted by Andrus and Bordeau [19] of Pratt & of fatigue and creep with dominant mechanisms Whitney on NARloy-Z liners with nickel close-outs, dependent on geometry, alloy choice, and liner demonstrated in Figure 4, in 1989 which were used environment [19,39,40]. Better understanding each of on the SSME revealed hot-wall temperatures ranging these contributions to wall thinning led to better from 477K in the nickel close-out to over 977K in designs throughout the SSME’s lifetime and into new the liner [19]. The nickel close-out has lower thermal rocket design. expansion and operating temperature which radially Fatigueisafailuremodethatoccurswhenamaterial restrains the hotter NARloy-Z liner which demon- is subjected to repeated cycles of stress and accumu- strated a tendency to expand radially outward [19]. lationofplasticstrain.Thenumberofcyclestofailure During a single cycle of operation, the restraint of the or fatigue life is dependent on the magnitude of the nickel close-out generates compressive thermal loads applied stress. High-cycle fatigue involves low applied in the hoop direction followed by relaxation during strain in the elastic regime that takes a long time to shutdown [19]. initiatefailure,oftenabove10,000cycles[23].Bycon- trast, low-cycle fatigue (LCF) is caused by relatively high plastic strain that initiates failure below 10,000 Rupture, fatigue, and creep cycles [23]. If the source of strain is from thermal The combustion chamber liner’s complex geometry expansion and generates plastic strain, it is referred and thermal loading during operation produces simi- to as low-cycle thermal fatigue (LCTF) and is one of larly complex stress and strain throughout the liner. thedominantfailuremodesofhightemperaturestruc- Asaresult,predictingfailureintheSSMEwaschallen- turalcomponents[41].Undertheoriginaldesigncon- ging and sources of failure were used to better under- straints presented by Cook and Coffey, the SSME stand alloy design and implementation. The main combustion chamber liner would require a fatigue life mechanical failure in the nozzle of rockets is rupture of at least 400 cycles at 700–900K [17]. If the strain of the cooling channels from wall thinning and is exceeds elastic limits, plastic strains accumulate in the referred to as the ‘dog house’ effect due to the profile liner during each cycle, producing LCTF [19]. that the originally rectangular channels assume over Low-cyclefatiguefromthermalcyclingalsopresents time, shown in Figure 4 [19,39]. In Figure 4, the web, concern of thermal mismatch strain, 1th, between the INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 403 Figure4.Channelthinningordoghouseeffectfailuremodedevelopmentofcombustionchamberlinersinorderofprogression andtopview,nottoscale;redrawn/modifiedfrom[1]. reinforcingparticlesandmatrixfollowingtherelation- temperature cycling [45]. The rate of ratcheting and ship wall thinning strongly depend on the degree of heat flux and channel geometry [46]. 1th =DaDT (13) During the Space Shuttle’s operation, the cooling where Dais the difference between the coefficients of channel geometry and cooling efficiency were better thermal expansion and DT represents the change in optimised with improved machining, fabrication, and temperature [36]. While deformation may appear prediction technologies which significantly reduced sufficiently elastic, thermal mismatch strain can the concern of the dog house effect [47]. Regardless account for intergranular plastic strain accumulation. of improvements, wall thinning from LCF and creep LoweringDabyparticleselection,improvesthelikeli- remain a concern for future designs and effort should hood of increased fatigue and creep resistance. How- be made to separate the effects of creep and LCF if ever, copper’s high thermal expansion coefficient, the hot-wall temperature is high enough to facilitate 17×10 −6 C −1 at room temperature, relative to most creep. strengtheningparticles,comparedinTable4,increases the selection challenge. Environmental resistance Creepisassociatedwithprogressivedeformationas a function of time under applied stresses at constant Thethrustchamberenvironmenthasserioushydrogen temperature [23,42,43]. Creep can occur over a wide embrittlement and blanching concerns due to high range of temperatures and stress levels and has mul- temperatures and the mix of liquid H and O fuels 2 2 tiple mechanisms responsible for progressive plastic undergoing combustion that can cause failure in the deformationmostlybasedondiffusionanddislocation liner if left unchecked. Other examples of detrimental motion. Although the operating time of each cycle is environmental effects include orange peel roughening short, creep can accumulate between cycles in a and cracking at inclusions but have been more easily phenomenon called cyclic creep if the thermal strain detected, prevented, and understood [19]. is high enough [44]. Another creep term that is often Hydrogenembrittlementislargelydependentonthe attributed to failure in the combustion chamber liners alloying elements in the Cu liner since Cu’s crystal iscreepratchettingwhichisaccumulatedplasticdefor- structure is FCC which is not susceptible to H mationspecificallyfromunequaltensileandcompres- embrittlement [48]. BCC and HCP metals are suscep- sive loading and incomplete stress–strain loops in tible to H embrittlement, but only if they are present Table4.CharacteristicsofcommonparticlesusedinstrengtheningCuandCr Nb,GRCopalloys’strengtheningphase,withCufor comparison. Heatofformation(kJ Meltingtemperature Modulusofelasticity Density(g Coefficientofthermalexpansion10−6(K−1)[at Phase mol−1) (K) (GPa) cm−3) temperature] AlO [1] −1667 2323 380 3.97 7.6[773K] 2 3 SiC[1] −67 2700 207 3.18 4.3[293K] CrNb(C15) −21[2]* 1858** 205[3] 7.71 6.4*[293K][3]* Cu 0 1358 110[4] 8.96 17[293K] *Averageofreportedvalues. **C15Cr2NbtransformstoC14above1858Kandmeltscongruentlyat2043KbasedontheCr-NbphasediagraminFigure5(c). 404 R.P.MINNECIETAL. as separate phases. NARloy-Z has demonstrated ade- reusability. Ellis and Michal of Case Western Reserve quate H embrittlement resistance despite its Ag University formulated Cu alloys with additions of Cr (BCC) and Zr (HCP) content because Ag and Zr are and Nb in the 1980s as candidate SSME liner alloys either in solid solution or as an intermetallic com- in collaboration with scribed in Table 2 [49,50]. (LeRC and now s thought to be caused by oxidation– At this time, limited to no Cu–Cr–Nb alloys had reduction cycles initiated by fluctuations, caused by been developed or publicised [9]. During a phone hot spots in the geometry or the eventual degradation interview in March 2020, Dr. David Ellis explained caused by constant combustion cycling during oper- that the original idea for the project was conceived by ation, in the oxygen–hydrogen fuel system. Blanching then-Branch Chief Dr. Tom Glasgow of tion and corrosion who demonstrated that chill block melt spinning ofthelinerwallandhasbeenobservedprecedingchan- (CBMS) could be used to form desirable Cu–Cr–Nb nel wall failure in failed NARloy-Z chambers alloys [60]. Glasgow then used a blanched regions of NAR- lowship to bring Ellis and his graduate advisor, Dr. loy-Z chambers revealed pits, cracks, fissures, and Gary Michal, onto the project and conduct more sponge-likeappearancewhichdamagesthethin-walled thorough alloying and characterisation [60]. CBMS’s coolant channels which roughen and decrease their high cooling rates were leveraged in an attempt to cooling efficiency [48]. Unlike H embrittlement, form a supersaturated solid solution with Cr and Nb. blanching has been the primary cause of failure in The supersaturated solution could then theoretically NARloy-Z liners and rocket engines in general [52]. be precipitation hardened by the formationof a stable This may appear to contradict with wall thinning as Cr Nb intermetallic that would provide similar the primary failure mode, but blanching has been strengthening methods compared to NARloy-Z’s Ag observed proceeding wall thinning and is likely a and Zr. The intermetallic was expected to have a low strong contributor due to how it impacts the surface. solid solubility which would enhance conductivity of Various researchers haveproposed and experimen- the matrix and provide a hard precipitate resistant to ted with thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) to improve shear and coarsening effects [60]. The majority of the thermal resistance and reduce blanching of the Ellis and Michal’s decisions and hypothesis on the chamber liners, turbine blades, and other SSME hard- new alloy were based on the best available alloys and ware[47,53–59].TBC’sareathincoatingofalowther- limited available literature including the Cu–Cr, Cu– mal conductivity material such as ZrO , ZrO -Y O , Nb, and Cr–Nb phase diagrams, shown in Figure 5. 2 2 2 3 andNiCrAlY(usedasabondcoating)thatcanreduce At the time to their knowledge, no ternary phase surface oxidation, improve corrosion resistance, and diagram was available, however, a Russian article by lower the temperature of the substrate on the hot side NikolayevandRozenbergpresentedternaryphasedia- ofathermalgradient[56,57].TBCscouldsignificantly grams and a quasi-binary Cu–NbCr phase diagram lower thermal strain have been estimated to improve from 1972 which they were likely unaware of at the the life of a combustion chamber liner by a factor of time [9,61]. The existence of a binary Cu–Cr Nb 3–30 [46]. While TBCs with NiCrAlY were applied to phase diagram was important to Ellis and Michal the turbine blades of the SSME, it doesn’t appear that because they inferred that an intermetallic Cu–Cr Nb any were used on the NARloy-Z liner due to issues of phase might form from substitution of Cu for Cr, coatingsfailingtoretainadherencetothelinerandspal- although no such intermetallic has been observed [9]. ling or flaking after repeated thermal cycles [53,58]. Michal later calculated a Cu-rich pseudo-binary DuringthecoatingofTBCs,thecoppersubstrate(NAR- phase diagram, but it would remain internal until it loy-Z) would oxidise and the coating would develop waspresentedbyAndersonwithoutadditionalcontext compressiveresidualstressesthatformedaroughcoat- ordetailsregardingitscalculation[62].Itwouldnotbe ingsurfacethatperformedpoorly[53].Variousgroups until2009thatLiuetal.’s[63]experimentallyandther- like Butler and Pindera have attempted functionally modynamically calculated phase equilibria provided gradingtheTBCintocombustionchamberlineralloys thorough ternary phase information on Cu–Cr–Nb to improve cohesion, but the barrier’s effectiveness and a binary Cu–Cr Nb phase diagram, presented in decreaseswhenthechemistryisaltered[59]. Figure 6, covering the full range of Cu which agreed with Nikolayev and Rozenberg’s work [61]. However, the binary phase diagram in Figure 6 does show a Development of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb Alloys solid solution gradient with temperature that will allow for precipitation strengthening. The maximum Relevant phase diagrams and Cr Nb 2 solidsolubilityofCr Nbislessthan1wt-%atthesoli- While NARloy-Z was used successfully on the SSME, dus (or on final solidification), and it continues to researchers were looking for and developing alterna- decrease with temperature allowing for more precipi- tives with better long-term properties and overall tation that can be enhanced with supersaturation. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 405 Figure5.Phasediagramsfor(a)Cu–Nb[1],(b)Cu–Cr[2]withupdatesfrom[3],and(c)Cr–Nb[4]. The Cr–Nb phase diagram, shown in Figure 5(c), and Michal during development. Based on the phase showsthattheintermetallicCr Nbphasehastwopoly- diagramofFigure5(c),Cr Nbsolidifiesfirstasthehex- 2 2 morphs. Since the intermetallic has an AB stoichi- agonal C14 Laves phase or MgZn structure type and 2 2 ometry, they both belong to what are commonly transforms to the cubic C15 Laves phase or Mg Cu referredtoas‘Laves’or‘Friauf-Laves’familyofphases between 1893 and 1923K [64,65]. The existence of [64]. The older Cr–Nb phase diagram presented is the C14 phase in the Cr–Nb phase diagram has been likely outdated but was the newest available to Ellis brought into question with some researchers Figure6.CalculatedbinaryCu–Cr NbphasediagramandCu-richinsertcalculatedbyandredrawnfrom[1]. 406 R.P.MINNECIETAL. concluding that it is a metastable phase [66]. These Cr Nb melts congruently at 2006K, well above the arguments are summarised well by Jiang et al. and hot-wall temperature of 700–900K and was assumed seem to be a matter of current debate, and our focus to have limited diffusion and interaction with Cu, willbeonC15Cr NbandFigure7showsitscrystallo- which was based on the existing phase diagrams and graphy [67]. results of Cu–Cr and Cu–Nb alloys [9,68–70]. Low TheNbatomsinC15Cr Nbarearrangedthesame solubility and diffusivity of Cr and Nb in liquid Cu as the zincblende structure, though with only Nb reduces the likelihood of Cr and Nb in solid solution, instead of with Zn and S, and the smaller Cr atoms and results in the formation of most of the Cr Nb fill every available tetrahedral interstitial site. This duringsolidificationandgeneralcoarseningbehaviour. structure is fairly stable, but from a temperature per- C15 Laves phases are known to be brittle at ambient spective,Cr NbisnotasstableasAl O orotheroxides temperatures and are currently commonly paired 2 2 3 with melting temperatures ranging from 2100 to with a ductile matrix to leverage their high strength 3400K, some of which are shown in Table 4 [36]. at high temperatures, but during the time of Ellis and Figure7.CrystalstructureoftheCr NbcubicC15Lavesphasedrawnfromatomiccoordinatesfrom[1]:(a)2dimensionalsequential stackingorientationwithatomlayersrepresentingpositions,modifiedpartiallyfrom[2],withdottedlinerepresentingoneunitcell; (b)unitcellofC15Cr Nb;(c)extendedtwodimensional(001)projection. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 407 Michal’swork,itseemsthatthegeneralfocuswasmore given the commercial designations ‘GRCop-84’ and on integrating ceramic particles [9,22,36,64]. ‘GRCop-42’ representing Glenn Research Copper alloy and their respective ratios in the early 2000s by Dr. Michael V. Nathal of k melt spinning alloying GRC’s effortsin developingthe alloy [60]. EllisandMichaltestedarangeofstoichiometricCr Nb Following their preliminary work, Ellis and Michal or 2:1, Cr:Nb atomic ratios balanced by Cu including performed extensive testing on the 8:4 and 4:2 Cr:Nb 2:1, 4:2, 6:3, 8:4, and 10:5 [9]. The 10:5 ratio was ratio alloys and directly compared NARloy-Z fabri- expected to be an over-alloyed condition that would cated and tested under the same conditions in 1996 form an incomplete solid solution, and 2:1 was set as [26]. Instead of alloying with CBMS, both GRCop anarbitraryminimum[9].Masteralloysintheseratios alloys were first alloyed by gas atomisation, hot- were first produced by induction melting and casting, extruded into cylindrical bars at 1130K, and tested in then re-melted and solidified into ribbons and flakes the as-extruded condition with no additional heat by CBMS under an Ar atmosphere with a chilled Cu treatments [26]. Thermal conductivity, yield strength, wheel [9,71,72]. Although commonly used for produ- UTS, LCF, and creep were extensively tested and the cing bulk metallic glasses, CBMS is useful for testing results of these tests provided statistically significant small volumes and can yield high cooling rates of evidence that the GRCop alloys’ properties were a 105–106 K s −1 under optimum conditions [31]. Some viable replacement option for combustion chamber of the ribbons were consolidated for by vacuum hot liners or other high-heat-flux applications. pressing at 124.2MPa and 923K for 1 hr [72]. Examination of the induction melted alloys using Difficulties of comparing high-heat-flux Cu X-ray diffraction and optical microscopy showed alloys evidence of a largely pure Cu matrix with large, centi- meter-sized FCC Cr Nb precipitates [9]. Cr precipi- High-heat-flux Cu alloys are difficult to compare tates were expected to be present but were not because of concerns with conductivity and the con- detected [9]. Using transmission electron microscopy dition of tested specimens including heat treatment (TEM)andselectareadiffraction(SAD)tointerrogate history,exactchemicalcomposition,andtestingequip- theCBMSproducedribbons,EllisandMichalasserted ment. Conductivity is a critical design consideration that Cu matrix was largely pure with distinct Cr Nb and dependent on the microstructure and processing particles in the HCP C14 phase with no evidence of conditions, but few studies measure conductivity due bulkmetallicglassformation[9].Intheavailablelitera- to lack of equipment or time constraints. In order to tureforCu–Cr–Nballoys,CBMSistheonlycasewhere provideanaccuraterepresentationofanalloy’sproper- C14 has been detected which is likely the result of the ties for comparison, the best available processing con- extreme cooling rates. Differential thermal analysis ditionshouldbeusedwithtestingconductedunderthe was run in an attempt to detect the transformation samestandardsandtestingconditionsforeachindivid- betweenC15andC14,buttheresultswereinconclusive ual alloy. Under ideal circumstances, thermal and [9]. Microstructural characterisation of the various mechanical measurements should be made on the ratiosshowedthe2:1ratioribbons’hadlong,columnar same batch of samples with descriptions of processing grains, the 8:4 and 10:5 had fine, equiaxed grains, and conditions. It is problematic to show thermal conduc- the4:2and6:3ratioshadmixedgrainmorphology[9]. tivity and mechanical strength as a function of temp- TheCr Nbprecipitatesweresmallandontheorderof erature for alloys with different thermal histories due 10nm for all of the alloy ratios which is unusually to the strong microstructure dependence of conduc- smallandlikelyduetotherapidcoolingrate.Addition- tivity. Comparisons of creep and LCF can be particu- ally, the precipitates demonstrated limited coarsening larly difficult since considerable time is required to by only growing to 20.6nm after aging at 773K for collectdata, andthereis a considerable rangeofstress 100h [9]. Nb precipitates were not detected in any of and temperature conditions that are rarely consistent the samples [9]. between experiments. The work by Ellis and Michal was successful in Experimental or literature-based comparisons of developinga new alloy withhighmechanical andther- high-heat-flux Cu alloys including NARloy-Z, mal stability. However, their mechanical and thermal GRCop-84, GRCop-42, GlidCop, and AMZIRC for property results are not comparable to current pro- nuclear reactors or rocket nozzle hardware have been duction properties due to variation in the processing conducted by various researchers [2,4,6,15,46,73–78] methods.Inthisinitialstudy,manyimportantconcerns that are each valuable for their particular trends and werevoicedthatwouldbeaddressedinlaterstudieswith observations. The majority of the reference-based focusgiventothe8:4and4:2Cr:Nbratiosbasedontheir data used to compare NARloy-Z, GlidCop, or preliminary performance. The 8:4 and 4:2 ratios have AMZIRC can be traced to a series of experiments by experiencedthemostdevelopmentandwereeventually Conway et al. of NECIETAL. high-qualitydataisneededforbettercomparisons[75– breakup of large molten droplets, and solidification of 77].Arguably,thebestandmostcurrentcomparisonis the final small (10–100 μm) powder particles [80]. deGrohetal.’s2008publication[78]whichcompares When gas is used, the breakup of the liquid metal GRCop-84, AMZIRC, NARloy-Z, GlidCop Al-15, Cu- stream occurs above the focal point of the gas stream 1Cr-0.1Zr, and Cu-0.9Cr. Each alloy was produced to as a result of a vacuum generated by the gas streams’ current standards in the same geometry, subjected to pressure,whichhelpsimprovetheefficiencyofthesec- the same heat treatment, tested under the same con- ondarybreakup[80].Dependingoncostandreactivity ditions, and compared for performance as high-heat- with the metal, gasses like Ar or N are used, forming flux alloys, with the exception of NARloy-Z which smooth, spherical particles from the liquid stream used existing data [78]. Microstructures, thermal [80]. Water and steam are inexpensive but form expansion, elongation, yield strength, reduction in more irregular shapes with high oxide content, so area, and general creep properties as a function of these methods are used primarily for low and high temperature are presented [78]. However, GRCop-42 alloy steels [80,81]. Standard gas atomisation with and more current processing methods of GRCop-84 inertgashasalowercoolingrateof102–103Ks −1com- are not included in the comparison, and thermal con- paredtoCBMS,whilesupersonicandclosecoupledgas ductivity data was not collected which should have a atomisation techniques have cooling rates comparable significant impact on the comparison. Tests could be to CBMS [9]. done with new material under the same conditions to GRCop-84’sgasatomisationspecificationsarefairly addtothecomparisonbutresultsmaydiffer,hopefully strict to help preserve the thermal conductivity of the onlyminordifferences,duetochangesinequipmentor end product and are partly listed by Gradl et al. [82]. operator.InthecaseofGRCopalloys,processingcon- Highpurityoftherawmaterialsiscriticaltominimise ditions have changeddramaticallyover time, andlim- FeandOcontamination,shownbyEllistohaveasig- ited data has been published, so a comprehensive nificantimpactontheperformanceasshowninFigure comparison of processing conditions is challenging. 9[2].AccordingtoGradletal.,GRCop-42issimplerto The followingsections willinstead focuson thelitera- producethroughgasatomisationcomparedtoGRCop- ture available for GRCop alloys, and comparisons to 84basedonanecdotalevidencefrompowdersuppliers. similar high-heat-flux alloys will prioritise de Groh ThealloywillreactwithN andformnitrides,soAris et al.’s data when possible. necessary for gas atomisation and should be used to backfill containers to minimise oxygen exposure. Additionally, a slight off-stoichiometric excess of Cr Processing, microstructure, and properties is added to suppress Nb precipitate formation and H of Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb alloys embrittlement concerns ranging from 2.02 to 2.05 Cr/Nb based on powder compositions presented in Fabrication of GRCop alloys Table 2. Cr precipitates are expected to be present One of GRCop alloys’ largest limitations is that they but are often difficult to detect due to their small size cannot be solidified by methods with low cooling and quantity. rateslikeconventionalcastingforhigh-heat-fluxappli- Following powder production, most powder metal- cations.Cr Nbwillformlargeprecipitatesover1cmin lurgyandweldingtechniquescanbeappliedtoGRCop diameter, exceeding those shown in Figure 8(b), that alloys without issue as well as warm and cold rolling, will not aid in mechanical strengthening or retention bump forming, stamping, metal spinning, and tube of conductivity [2]. Serviceable GRCop-84 hardware drawing[2].duced by a variety of fabrication and solidationmethodsincludingdirectextrusion,hotiso- post-processingtechniquesbutistypicallyfirstalloyed static pressing (HIP) to form, and vacuum plasma inameltandsolidifiedintobulkpowderbygasatomi- spraying (VPS) into shape and densifying with HIP sation with Ar. [2]. ing The resulting powder has a fine distribution of techniques including diffusion bonding, inertia weld- Cr Nb precipitates in powder particles visible in ing, friction stir welding, electron beam welding, and Figure 8(a) [2,79]. While other rapid solidification brazing, but limited information on these techniques techniques could be used to produce fine microstruc- is available currently [2,83,84]. Combustion chamber tures,gasatomisationismoreaffordableandproduces linersof GRCop-84 havebeenproducedby VPS,con- powderwithhighpurityandconsistency.Gasatomisa- ventional wrought processing, and by powder bed tion is a rapid solidification technique where a liquid additive manufacturing (AM), with AM proving to metal stream is reduced to small particles by gas jets be the most versatile processing technique [82,85]. and is often used for its high production volume and Theterm‘wrought’isusedinGRCopliteraturetorep- relative cost. The number of jets and configuration resent conventional processing methods like extrusion canvary,butgasatomisationconsistsofthreeprimary or rolling and the terminology used by the original stages: breakup of a liquid metal stream, secondary authors will be maintained. Fabrication of GRCop-42 INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 409 Figure8.MicrographsofGRCop-84;(a)GasatomisedpowdershowingpurecoppermatrixwithCr Nbparticlesrepresentedbythe greyphase[1];(b)Typicalcastmicrostructureshowinglarge,elongatedCr Nb[2];(c)Etched,as-extrudedwithvisiblematrixgrains andCr Nbparticlesandagglomerationsrepresentedbythelighterphase[1];(d)Extrudedmicrostructureafter1273Kexposurefor 30mindemonstratingmorevisiblegrainandparticleboundaries[1],adaptedwithpermission. Figure9.ThermalconductivityasafunctionoftemperatureforexistingdataonGRCopalloysincludingwrought,extruded,andL- PBF(SLM)andoxygen-freehighconductivity(OFHC)Cuforcomparison;redrawnfromplotsfrom[1–5]withpermission. 410 R.P.MINNECIETAL. hasbeendemonstratedwithseveraltechniquesinclud- GRCopalloyswouldlikelyprovideevidencetosupport inghotextrusionandAM,anymethodsthatworkwith their relative ease of AM. GRCop-84 should be viable with GRCop-42. The spe- Additive manufacturing often results in inherent cifications of extrusion, HIPing, and commercial roll- porosity,anisotropy,andreproducibilityconcernsthat ing are detailed by Ellis et al. [86]. must be addressed before implementation. Post-pro- Before AM, several concepts were available for fab- duction annealing and HIP, often standard on aero- ricating new liners and nozzles with GRCop alloys to space hardware, are usually sufficient to ensure near improve SSME designs. These are described by Ellis theoretical density and homogeneity [88]. ning plate, directly PBF development of GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 has HIPing into a cylinder or hourglass shape, diffusion progressedtothepointwhereL-PBFbuildparameters bonding platelets, and forming tubing, but these pro- have been established and practical hot-fire tests of L- cesses all require considerable machining to produce PBF GRCop liners have been performed [82,88]. cooling channels which are intrinsic to the operation with of theliners.Annealing andcoldworkhavea demon- L-PBFinformingcombustionchamberlinersandwas strable effect on the room-temperature tensile proper- akeycomponentofthelow-costupperstagepropulsion ties, but Ellis et al. showed that recovery and (LCUSP) project [10,85], but the majority of and 873K build parameters and characterisation efforts are depending on the degree of cold work, so the benefits internalandnotcurrentlyavailabletothepublic.How- of cold work will be lost in high-heat-flux operations ever,Gradletal.mentionthatprocessparametersand [86]. At temperatures where cold work could improve characterisationdataareavailabletoindustrytoexpand GRCop-84’s mechanical properties, other alloys with more optimal properties should be considered. processparametersaredifferentthanGRCop-84[89]. AtechnicalmemorandumbyCooperetal.[90]pro- vides Additive manufacturing andinitialparametertestingforGRCop-42on a Con- Cualloyspresenttwomainchallengeswithpowderbed ceptLaser M2 system though the focus of the memor- AM:reflectivitywithconventionallasersandhighther- andum is on GRCop-42, and the parameters may not mal conductivity of the powder [87]. Copper has high be current. Their ConceptLaser uses a single 400 W reflectivity with infrared light (1 μm) used in conven- Nd:YAG laser with a spot size of 52 μm, travel speed tionallasers,sothemajorityoftheenergyusedbycon- of 50–5,000 m s −1, and the build chamber is filled ventionallaseradditivesystemswillnotbeabsorbedby with Ar [90]. The default parameters for GRCop-84 Cupowderandcaninhibitmelting.Ifsufficientenergy include a core laser power of 180 W, core scan speed isabsorbedtoinitiatemelting,themeltzonewillhave of 800 mm s −1, hatch width of 0.105 mm, build layer high local thermal gradients that will either inhibit thickness of 0.03 mm, and core energy density of melting or cause delamination, layer curling, and 95.2 J mm −3. The coolest, fastest parameters in this build failure [87]. A review of AM of pure Cu has memorandum for GRCop-42 are 270 W, 1,025 m beenpublishedbyTranetal.onselectivelasermelting s −1, 0.099, 0.045 mm, and 59.1 J mm −3 in the same (SLM), electron beam melting, binder jet, and ultra- order as the parameters for GRCop-84 [90]. Cooper sonic AM [87]. Green lasers, which have a shorter et al. were able to improve on the build parameters of wavelength of 515 nm, have been used for Cu with GRCop-84 by successfully increasing the build layer laser-based AM, but they are more expensive and less thickness and scan speed which improves the print common [87]. time by about 20% [90]. Characterisation work by As Gradl et al. discuss, GRCop-84 is unusual Hayes et al. provides some general metallography and because it is easily melted by conventional SLM, a mechanical properties of L-PBF GRCop-84, and com- form of laser-powder bed fusion (L-PBF) AM [88]. puted tomography of small-scale L-PBF GRCop-84 As the more generic term, L-PBF will be used to rep- linersincludingdemonstrationofanewcoolingchannel resentsourcesthatreferenceSLM.Gradletal.postulate designandorientationthatcanbeachievedbyAM,but that the presence of the Cr Nb precipitates is respon- more thorough characterisation is necessary for future sibleforinitiatingmeltingbyloweringtheinitialreflec- development [85]. The design freedom allowed by AM tivity of the powder [88]. Cu’s reflectivity decreases for the cooling channels provides a strong motivation rapidly with temperature, so as long as enough initial topursueAMasGRCopalloysmainmethodoffabrica- energy can be absorbed, melting should initiate [88]. tionforhigh-heat-flux applications inthe future. Additionally, the thermal conductivity is reduced by the high alloying content which likely contributes to Microstructure of wrought GRCop-84 the ease of AM by reducing heat dissipation. GRCop- 42hasbeenshowntohaveasimilaraffinitywithcon- Therearefewmicrostructure-focusedstudiesavailable ventionalL-PBF[82].Measuringthereflectivityofthe for GRCop alloys with the exception of gas-atomised INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 411 powderandextrudedGRCop-84,themajorityofwhich Anderson et al. estimated the strengthening contri- have been contributed by Groza and Anderson butionoftheprimaryandsecondaryparticlesusingthe [29,30,62,79,91]. While there are newer fabrication Orowan-Ashby equation for a random distribution of methodsavailable,suchasAM,theavailableliterature impenetrable particles (Equation (3)) [92]. The pri- is developing, so gas-atomised powder and extruded mary particles were found to contribute little to GRCop-84 are the best available representation of the strengthening based on estimates of the Orowan- alloy and should be comparable to newer methods. Ashbyequation,whilethesecondaryparticlesprovided GrozaandAndersoninvestigatedthemicrostructural ahighdegreeofstrengthening.However,thelargepar- featuresofgas-atomisedGRCop-84powderwhichhada ticles contribute to grain boundary (Hall-Petch) powderparticlesizeoflessthan106μm[79].Thepow- strengthening by pinning the matrix grains and pre- derusedinthisstudyisnotdirectlycomparabletocur- venting grain growth [30], evidenced by the copper rent gas-atomised powder used for powder bed AM matrixgrainsexhibitingslowgrowthwithamaximum which has a powder particle size of 25–40 μm, shown sizeof4from0.9μmintheas-extrudedcondition[29]. in Figure 8(a), but the general precipitate distribution Basedonparticlesizeandstressmeasurements,Ander- and trends are comparable. The more current powder son et al. calculated the contribution of Orowan and of Figure 8(a) is used as a visual reference for Groza Hall-Petch strengthening with good agreement to and Anderson’s work because it is the best available experimental results with Equation (3) [30]. The micrograph which shows distinct separation of the Cu Hall-Petch strengthening is dominant with roughly matrixandCr Nbparticles,butitisnotthesamepow- two-thirdsofthecontributiontostrength,andOrowan der. Groza and Anderson identified a bimodal distri- contributes roughly one-third, contrary to prior esti- bution of primary and secondary Cr Nb precipitates mates[30].Thisappearstorevealthetruestrengthen- ontheorderof1μmand10-100nm,respectively[79]. ing nature of the Cr Nb precipitates and their role in Groza and Anderson suggest that the primary par- thehightemperaturepropertiesofGRCop-84keeping ticles solidify and grow rapidly during atomisation the matrix grains small by pinning the grain bound- before the surrounding Cu matrix can solidify which aries and preventing coarsening while keeping the yieldslargeprimaryparticles[79,91].Theprimarypar- matrix as pure as possible for high conductivity. This ticles are irregular in shape, which can be observed in strengtheningratiohasbeencitedfornewerfabrication the more current powder of Figure 8(a), from their methods but has not been reproduced and should be lack of constraint in the liquid and serve partially as reevaluated for the new microstructures. nucleatingsitesfortheCumatrix.Thesecondarypar- ticles are hypothesised to precipitate out of the matrix grains because the secondary particles are primarily Room-temperature properties of GRCop alloys observed within the matrix grains and the matrix should be supersaturated considering the cooling Room-temperaturepropertiesaresomewhatunnecess- rates [79,91]. ary for high-heat-flux applications, but they are the The bimodal distribution observed in the gas-ato- mostcommontypeoftestsandcanprovideabaseline mised powder persists in extruded GRCop-84, shown comparison between alloys. A selection of extruded inFigure8(c,d).Theaveragediameteranddistribution GRCop-84’s properties relevant to high-heat-flux oftheprimaryandsecondaryparticlesintheextruded applications are presented in Table 5. There is data materialremainsroughlythesameasthepowder[92]. available for other processing conditions, but they are This demonstrates that the starting powder micro- often incomplete, with unknown aging or annealing structure has a significant impact on the final micro- history, or only data is available in the as-fabricated structure, so powder quality and optimisation might condition. Furthermore, the properties of extruded improve the final microstructures. Both the primary GRCop-84 have improved with better processing and particles and Cu matrix grains had limited coarsening aging conditions, so comparisons between sources is behaviour during heat treatments which is ideal for challenging. Some of GRCop-42’s properties have high temperature performance. Following aging treat- recently been published [82], but a general properties ments at 773 and 973K, below the Cu-Cr Nb solvus table has not been published and would be useful for temperature (see Figure 6), further precipitation was future development. observedintheextrudedmaterialasadistinctsecond- Alloys used at high temperatures are best demon- ary distribution of particles which indicates that the strated by temperature dependence, so GRCop-42 matrix is supersaturated [92]. Even after an aging of and −84’s thermal conductivity, yield strength (YS), 1323K for 100h, the mean primary precipitate diam- ultimate tensile strength (UTS), creep, LCF, and ther- eter only increased from 0.93±0.04 to 1.35±0.03 mal expansion as a function of temperature are com- μm, where the±represents standard error [92]. This pared with oxygen-free high thermal conductivity is consistent with statements that the coarsening of (OFHC) Cu serving as the baseline example when Cr Nb is slow in GRCop-84. available. 412 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Thermal conductivity At room temperature, extruded, <20ppm Fe, GRCop-84’s thermal conductivity is ∼76%, based on GRCop-84’sthermalconductivitycomparedtosimilar Figure 9, of OFHC’s room temperature thermal con- high-heat-flux alloys is its weakest property due to its ductivity, ∼400 W mK −1 [78], while NARloy-Z’s is highalloyingcontentandcanbesignificantlyimpacted ∼91%.Forcomparison,AMZIRChasthehighestavail- by impurities In 2000, Ellis and Keller with Thermo- able thermal conductivity of high-heat-flux copper physical Properties Research Laboratory (TPRL), Inc. alloys at 92.5% OFHC Cu, and GlidCop Al-15’s is in West Lafayette, IN [93] calculated thermal conduc- approximately 80% OFHC Cu [78]. Extruded tivity and electrical resistivity of extruded GRCop-84 GRCop-42’s lower alloying content provides signifi- usingtheKohlrauschmethod.Sincebothconductivity cantlyfewerscatteringsites,whichresultsinathermal andresistivityarecalculated,theLorenznumbercould conductivity ∼86.5% OFHC Cu at room temperature be determined and was measured between 29 and which is a significant improvement over GRCop-84. 480K with 5 powder lots [93]. The Lorentz number Extruded <20ppm Fe GRCop-84’s thermal conduc- was significantly higher than pure Cu’s and demon- tivity,showninFigure9,demonstratessometempera- strated a mild temperature dependence, but these ture dependence. The thermal conductivity first results had not taken Fe impurity into account and increases to a maximum value of ∼79.5% OFHC Cu are not accurate to current GRCop-84 chemistry. at ∼535K and then decreases steadily up to ∼900K. Although theLorenz number increased, Ellis andKel- Attemperaturesabove900K,thethermalconductivity ler believed that this was caused by the thermal con- continues to decrease but at a noticeably lower rate. ductivity increasing and electrical resistivity Theseregionsmayhelpidentifychangesinthemicro- decreasing in response to the material dynamically structure between these temperature ranges, but this annealingduringthemeasurements[93].So,itisposs- data is from a single sample and more, repeated data iblethattheLorenznumberisconstantforGRCop-84, sets would be necessary to be certain that these shifts though an updated and more accurate measurement are not anomalous. has not been acquired. In 2005, Ellis found that Fe impurities on the order of 200–250ppm from the Cr melt stock had a significant impact on GRCop-84’s Tensile properties conductivity, illustrated in Figure 9 and Table 5, and new processing guidelines ensure or require the con- AccordingtoEllisetal.,optimisationoftensilestrength centration of Fe to be <20ppm, so the mechanical at high temperatures is not the primary design con- properties should remain largely unaffected [2]. This siderationofthecombustionchamberliner,buttensile distinction makes comparisons problematic with strength provides a readily tested macroscopic indi- results before this publication because the Fe concen- cator of thermal stability against thermal cycling [86]. tration was not commonly measured and often This 2012 study by Ellis et al. presents a thorough unknown and unreported. characterisation of GRCop-84 tensile properties fabri- Gradletal.[12]presentasignificantamountofdata cated by various methods including extrusions, for L-PBF GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 including ther- HIPed billet, rolled plate, rolled sheet, drawn tube, malconductivitywhichisshowninFigure9.However, andVPS,underavarietyofheat-treatmentconditions thedatacollectionmethodandthermalhistoryarenot including annealed, brazed, and cold worked [86]. presented, and they are assumed to be in the as-built Theyreportedthatprocessingmethodshadaminimal condition. Both GRCop alloys have significantly effectonthetensileproperties,thoughtheHIPedbillet lower thermal conductivity than their wrought had the worst performance, likely due to the higher counterparts which is likely due to a detrimental consolidating temperatures and longer thermal microstructural change by additive processing. This exposuresresultinginlargergrainandprecipitatepar- could be caused by residual stress, stoichiometry ticle sizes [86]. Regardless of processing or heat-treat- change, or dissolved content and could likely be ment conditions, the GRCop-84 samples were noted reversed by heat treatment or HIP, so these results to exhibit similar stress–strain behaviour with the may not be indicative of the optimal properties. L- exception of cold work [86]. PBF GRCop-84’s thermal conductivity demonstrates As-extruded, annealed, and brazed GRCop-84 a significant decrease starting at ∼850K, and Gradl revealed similar general tensile behaviour, demon- etal.[12]postulatethatthedecreaseiscausedbyexcess strated by the as-extruded results in Figure 10, with a Cr dissolving into the Cr matrix. GRCop-42 also minimal elastic region less than 0.5% strain and long decreases but at a much lower rate, which is likely plastic region greater than 20% [86]. When the yield due toa higherdegree ofexcessCr.In practicalappli- point is reached, as-extruded GRCop-84 rapidly cationofGRCop-84,theamountofexcessCrshouldbe reaches a stress near its UTS and remains near that optimisedtoreducethiseffectwithcaretakentoretain stress for 10–20% elongation followed by 5–15% hydrogen-embrittlement resistance. elongation during necking before failure [86]. Ellis INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 413 Table 5.Room temperaturepropertiesofGRCopalloys including somemechanicalbrazing dataandsomeSLMGRCop-84and GRCop-42data;alldataisfromtheindicatedreferencesandshouldbeconsideredapproximateduetolimitedstatistics. YS UTS Elongation ReductioninArea ModulusofElasticity Density SpecificHeat Thermalconductivity Alloy (MPa) (MPa) (%) (%) (GPa) (kgm−3) (Jkg−1k−1) (Wm−1K−1) ExtrudedGRCop-84 196.2 368[1] 21.7[1] 39.7[1] 112[2] 8.81–8.83+[3] 381.8++[3] 284i[4] [1] 187*[1] 361*[1] 25.5*[1] 40.6*[1] 304ii[4] 226[5] 368.2[5] ExtrudedGRCop-42 200[5] 422[5] 30[5] 8.88–8.89+[3] 346[5] SLM&HIPGRCop-84 208[5] 390[5] 30[5] SLM&HIPGRCop-42 173[5] 357[5] 32.9[5] *Brazedat1208K. i<20ppmFeinterpretedfromgraphicaldata. ii200ppmFeinterpretedfromgraphicaldata. +TheoreticaldensityrangebasedonpowderalloyingcompositionofTable1,measureddensitynotavailable. ++Calculatedfromtemperaturedependentequationsat300K. et al. studied strain-rate dependence for annealed and Tensile data for as-built L-PBF GRCop-84 and −42 47% cold-worked GRCop-84 tensile specimens in a specimens, collected at room temperature, also pre- range of strain rates of 0.01–0.0008 s −1. The annealed sented in Figure 10, demonstrate significantly more samples demonstrated limited dependence while the brittle behaviour with a higher UTS and reduced cold-worked samples had some dependence [86]. elongation [82,86]. L-PBF samples that were HIPed demonstrate a similar tensile behaviour compared to as-extruded GRCop-84, though slightly more ductile with a ∼16–33% increase in final elongation [82,86]. InbothL-PBFcases,GRCop-42demonstratedreduced strength but longer elongations compared to GRCop- 84 [82]. In high-heat-flux applications, changes to UTS and YSwithtemperaturehelpdemonstrateanalloy’slossof mechanical strength at high temperatures. The UTS and YS as a function of temperature for OFHC Cu and GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 in a variety of con- ditions are presented in Figures 11 and 12. Gradl etal.discussthattheoperatingpressuresinthecooling channelwallsofcombustionchamberlinerscanbeup to40MPa,sothebenefitofhigherYSandUTSisthat thinner walls can be used resulting in better cooling efficiency and lower hot-wall temperatures [82]. Simi- lar to the thermal conductivity, the L-PBF samples are assumed to be in the as-built condition. The UTS and YS of the L-PBF samples are significantly higher, 20–30MPainsomecases,thanthewroughtconditions at elevated temperatures which is a significant improvement. The improvement of mechanical prop- ertiesmayhelpbalancethelowerthermalconductivity athightemperaturesinpracticaluse.Below∼873Kfor YS and ∼700K for UTS, GRCop-84’s mechanical properties are better than GRCop-42 which compen- sates somewhat for the shortcoming of GRCop-84’s lowerthermalconductivity.Abovethesetemperatures, GRCop-42performsbetterinYSandroughlythesame in UTS, which is likely caused by the comparatively Figure 10. Stress-strain plots (tensile) (a) data collected on weak Cu matrix dominating the strength [82]. GRCop-84 and GRCop-42, processed using a variety of tech- niqueswithpostprocessingtreatments,andseveraltempera- Compared to similar high-heat-flux alloys, GRCop turesbetweenroomtemperatureand1073K;Ifnotspecified, alloys demonstrate low loss of UTS and YS at high data was collected at room temperature [1,2].Marshall Space temperatures and after high temperature exposures. Flight Center’s (MSFC) tensile specimens were fabricated on ThisisbestdemonstratedbydeGrohetal.’scompari- a Concept M2 SLM system, and the vendor’s were built on son of common high-heat-flux alloys in as-received an EOS M400. (b) Low strain regime of as-extruded GRCop- 84datafrom(a)redrawnwithpermission. andbrazedat1208Kconditions,shownbydatapoints 414 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Figure11.UltimatetensilestrengthasafunctionoftemperatureforexistingdataonGRCopalloysinwrought,extruded,andL-PBF (SLM)conditionswithOFHCCuforcomparison;redrawnandcombinedfrom[1–5]. extracted in Table 6. The alloys were subjected to the UTS and YS loss compared to the other alloys. This braze to simulate a brazing operation typical of a can be related to their microstructures which are main combustion chamber liner to apply a brazed strengthened with thermally stable Cr Nb and Al O 2 2 3 structural jacket [78]. The simulated braze demon- precipitates. While other alloys demonstrate better strates how the alloys’ properties will change after a UTS and YS below 773K, brazed GlidCop Al-15 and braze (if required) or exposure to the highest realistic GRCop-84 have superior UTS and YS values above temperatures in the combustion chamber liner, and 773K. Although as-received Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr and Cu- the same simulated braze was used for each brazed 0.9Cr have better UTS and YS then GRCop-84, their sample in de Groh et al.’s experiment. These results brazed counterparts are at least half that of brazed shouldbeusedmoreforcomparisonofhightempera- GRCop-84, and the as-received values are likely to tureexposureratherthanpropertychangeafterabraze dropaftercontinuedhightemperatureexposuressimi- cyclebecausetherequirementsfortheindividualalloys lar to those in practice [78]. L-PBF GRCop alloys and afterabrazecyclehavenotbeentakenintoaccount.At wrought GRCop-42 in brazed conditions will likely alltemperatures,GRCop-84andGlidCopAl-15arethe perform similar to wrought GRCop-84 but should be least effected by the brazing cycle and exhibit limited tested to the benefit of the literature. Figure12.YieldstrengthasafunctionoftemperatureforexistingdataonGRCopalloysinwrought,extruded,andL-PBF(SLM) conditionswithOFHCCuforcomparison;redrawnandcombinedfrom[1–5]. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 415 Table6.Comparisonof(a)UTSand(b)YSofhigh-heat-fluxdatafrom[1,2]inroughdescendingorderbetween300and773Kand separated/reorganisedat923Ktohelpdemonstratetheshiftinstrength;OFHCCuconditionisunknown,butprovidesbaseline value;estimatedfromdatapointsoffiguresby[1]withGRCop-84’sdatabasedontheaverageofHIPedandextrudedmaterialwith fivetestsateachtemperature,andallothersareestimatesoftwotests;OFHCCuandNARloy-Zdataestimatedfromtrendlines[2]. UltimateTensileStrength(MPa) (a) Alloy Condition 300K 773K – 923K Condition Alloy Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr As-received 564 293 125 As-received GlidCopAl-15 AMZIRC As-received 509 264 125 Brazed GlidCopAl-15 Cu-0.9Cr As-received 495 206 118 As-received Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr GlidCopAl-15 As-received 464 184 104 As-received Cu-0.9Cr GlidCopAl-15 Brazed 408 174 86 As-received GRCop-84 GRCop-84 As-received 368 153 82 Brazed GRCop-84 GRCop-84 Brazed 361 148 46 Brazed Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr NARloy-Z* STA 315 187 33 Brazed Cu-0.9Cr Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr Brazed 266 89 34 Brazed AMZIRC Cu-0.9Cr Brazed 245 62 32 As-received AMZIRC AMZIRC Brazed 231 104 OFHCCu* Unknown 217 84 YieldStrength(MPa) (b) Alloy Condition 300K 773K – 923K Condition Alloy Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr As-received 551 284 126 As-received GlidCopAl-15 AMZIRC As-received 501 261 126 Brazed GlidCopAl-15 Cu-0.9Cr As-received 442 207 112 As-received Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr GlidCopAl-15 As-received 465 184 100 As-received Cu-0.9Cr GlidCopAl-15 Brazed 409 175 73 As-received GRCop-84 GRCop-84 As-received 196 114 69 Brazed GRCop-84 GRCop-84 Brazed 187 105 55 STA NARloy-Z* NARloy-Z* STA 138 93 36 Brazed Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr Brazed 107 67 29 As-received AMZIRC Cu-0.9Cr Brazed 90 43 23 Brazed Cu-0.9Cr OFHCCu* As-received 52 33 16 Brazed AMZIRC AMZIRC Brazed 32 25 *Indicatesestimatedandinterpretedfromtrendlines. **STAindicatessolutiontreatedandaged. Creep properties and characteristics Deckeretal.in2004andEllisetal.in2015conducted creep tests with GRCop-84 over a range of tempera- tures and strain rates that could be experienced by the combustion chamber liner in service [40,94]. At thetimeofDeckeretal.’sstudy,themostcommonpro- ductionmethodsofGRCop-84wereas-extrudedoras- rolled following the extrusion, and these two forms were both creep tested [94]. The creep tests were per- formed in tension with a constant stress creep instru- ment under vacuum. A range of temperatures from 764 to 1068K and stresses from 12.5 to 200MPa were examined to determine the activation energies needed for creep, and analysis included applying sev- eral creep models to the results. Ellis’s [40] creep study was more focused on liner application and generating statistically significant data to help qualify and provide to potential models predicting GRCop-84’s creep response during service while investigating the effect of processing on creep. Large and small extrusions, plate, brazed plate, pro- duction sheet, HIP billets, pre-production sheet, and Figure 13. (a) Creep results for three temperatures and con- friction stir welded sheet were creep tested at 773, stant-stress conditions of extruded GRCop-84, redrawn from 923, and 1073K to determine the influence of proces- [1]; primary (I), secondary (II), and tertiary (III) creep regions are labelled for the 746 K creep test; (b) – Axial creep results sing on creep properties with constant load tests [40]. for three constant temperatures and various constant stress The creep tests were conducted in both vacuum and conditions tested at a strain rate of 0.0001 s−1, only the 69 inairatthreeseparatelaboratoriessospecialconsider- MPa–873Ksamplebrokeduringtesting[2]. ationwasgiventoerrorsintheircomparison.Ellisetal. 416 R.P.MINNECIETAL. focused on formulating a forward stepwise regression environment [95]. In particular, different fabrication analysis to compare fabrication and only the power methods produce roughly the same grain size, but law creep model was fit to the data [40]. changes to texture can have a substantial impact on Typical creep curves of GRCop-84 generated by creep properties [40]. For the small extrusions, plate, Decker et al., Figure 13(a), show three distinctregions andpre-productionsheettherewasevidenceoftexture ofcreep,andthestrainisofteninexcessof10%incon- havinganimpactoncreep,thoughthechangeismini- trast to dispersion strengthened alloys which usually mal[40].Therefore,fabricationmethodshouldnotbe havelowductility.Mostofthestrainiswithinthesec- fully excluded from future creep studies of GRCop ondary and tertiary regions, with a short primary. alloysandcouldbeutilisedtoimprovecreepproperties GRCop-84 also lasts longer in the secondary creep by texture control. regimewithaneasytransitiontotertiarycreep,Figure Regardless of fabrication, wrought GRCop-84 has 13, which results in total elongations of 8–14%, which generally good creep characteristics compared to the resembles creep curves of pure metals according to other high temperature Cu alloys studied by de Groh Decker et al. [40]. Another constant stress study by et al. [78]. The step loaded and constant load creep Lerch et al., Figure 13(b), shows that extruded results are compared in Table 7 based on the rate GRCop-84’s creep behaviour at lower temperatures equations at a strain rate of 1×10 −6 s −1. Not all of have only two distinct creep regions and stays mostly the samples reached this strain rate, so some have within the steady-state, secondary creep [40]. beenextrapolatedforcomparison.Creepresultsshould ThemajorityofDeckeretal.’smeasuredstressexpo- notnormallybeextrapolatedasthestrainrateorcreep nents ranged from 7.6 to 10 with an outlier of 4.7 at mechanism could change outside of these regions and 1068K under low stress conditions which could indi- is only included here to compare a limited data set. cate evidence of dislocation climb controlled creep in Additionally, the condition of the GRCop-84 creep that region [94]. Ellis et al. calculated similar stress samples was not explicitly stated with the presented exponentsrangingfrom6.6–8.26fortheeightfabrica- data, so comparison of the as-received and brazed tion methods tested [40]. The general range of stress GRCop-84isbasedondeGroh’sanalysis.Theirresults exponents for both studies are indicative of creep revealedthatGlidCopAl-15hadthebestcreepproper- behaviour of dispersion strengthened alloys or metal ties at high temperatures followed by brazed GRCop- matrix composites. Decker et al. found that GRCop- 84, similar to UTS and YS behaviour [78]. AMZIRC, 84’s diverse creep characteristics of pure metal strain Cu–1Cr–0.1Zr,andCu–0.9Cr’screepstresswassignifi- and high creep exponents made applying a model of cantlyreducedafterthesimulatedbrazeandwerewell creep behaviour difficult [94]. They attempted to below GlidCop and GRCop-84’s creep stress at the apply a power law relationship, but almost all of the samestrainrateandtemperatures.Atsimilartempera- datawaswellabovepower-lawbreakdownandinstead tures and stresses, NARloy-Z’s creep response is rela- appliedahyperbolicsinerelationship,whichincorpor- tively poor and has been observed to have creep ates an exponential dependence on stress, to interpret lifetimesuptoathirdofwroughtGRCop-84’slife[2]. data. Compared to GRCop-84, GRCop-42 has limited Both studies applied a Monkman-Grant relation- available creep data. Ellis and Michal’s study compares ship to compare fabrication conditions. The Monk- the creep behaviour of GRCop-84, GRCop-42, and man-Grant relationship is simple to test; if the slope NARloy-Z [26]. Though, theseresultsarebestused for is constant for minimum creep rate as a function of qualititative comparisons. Specifically, both GRCop rupture time, fabrication does not impact the creep alloys’ data were not consistent between tests, with properties. Decker et al. found a slope of −1.08 and over 2% strain difference between tests conducted at determined the fracture mechanism was the same the same stress level in some cases and did not fit well between rolled and extruded material [94]. Ellis et al. to linear trends [26]. In general, GRCop-42’s creep calculated a slope of −1.11 in agreement to Decker properties were slightly inferior but comparable to etal.’sresults;however,theforwardstepwiseregression those of GRCop-84 [26]. Ellis and Michal noted that analysisshowedastatisticallysignificantimpactofpro- the as-extruded GRCop-84 showed limited stage III cessing on creep response, though differences in tex- creep, as shown in the creep curves in Figure 13(b) ture, testing environment, or scatter of the data could from a 2017 study by Lerch et al. [96], whereas also contribute to explaining the results [40]. In 2011, GRCop-42 was more likely to exhibit more stage III Ellis and Loewenthal [95] conducted a follow-up creep [26]. A more recent comparison of extruded study to assess the variation of previous creep results. GRCop-84 and −42 from Gradl et al. in 2019 [82] Byimprovingthespecimentemperaturemeasurement shows that the creep rate and lifetimes are similar, and control, the scatter in the data was from 2 to ½ shown in Figure 14. While there are some deviations, orders of magnitude for extruded GRCop-84, demon- bothalloysstilldemonstratesimilarcreepratesandlife- strating that the scatter in data collected before the timesunderthetestedconditions[82].Gradletal.pos- 2011studyislargelyduetocomplicationsofthetesting tulate that while the Cr Nb precipitates of the GRCop INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 417 Table7.Powerfunctionconstantsforhigh-heat-fluxCualloys(a)steploadedsecondarysteadystatecreepand(b)constantload, secondary, steady (cid:7)sta(cid:6)t(cid:6)e(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6)te(cid:6)nsile creep; with calculated stress based on the power function constants of the form 1Ç =Asn converted to s= n(1Ç/A), where n is the stress exponent, A is the pre-exponential factor constant, 1Ç is creep rate in units of s −1,andσisstress;reusedfrom[1]withaddedcalculatedstressandsomeas-receiveddataremovedforclarity. (a) Alloy Condition Temperature(K) A n EstimatedStepLoadedCreepTensileStress(MPa) GlidCop* As-received 773 7.71E−57 22.93 153 GlidCop* Brazed 773 3.72E−34 12.4 163 GlidCop* As-received 923 4.58E−39 15.9 108 GlidCop* Brazed 923 8.48E−38 15.5 101 GRCop-84 NotSpecified 773 4.77E−26 9.49 109 GRCop-84 NotSpecified 923 7.17E−24 10.32 46 AMZIRC* Brazed 773 4.18E−13 3.73 51 AMZIRC Brazed 923 2.99E−11 3.65 17 Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr Brazed 773 5.94E−17 5.71 62 Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr Brazed 923 1.50E−14 5.52 26 Cu-0.9Cr* Brazed 773 4.00E−14 5.08 29 Cu-0.9Cr Brazed 923 1.27E−10 3.83 10 (b) Alloy Condition Temperature(K) A n EstimatedConstantLoadStress(MPa) GlidCop* As-received 773 2.392E−87 36.40497 164 GlidCop* Brazed 773 1.195E−205 91.21151 152 GlidCop As-received 923 3.312E−61 26.74301 109 GlidCop* Brazed 923 2.762E−56 24.69575 102 GRCop-84 NotSpecified 773 1.042E−22 7.67 121 GRCop-84 NotSpecified 923 3.400E−21 8.52 50 AMZIRC* Brazed 773 1.633E−23 9.4861 59 AMZIRC* Brazed 923 2.141E−17 7.80399 23 CuCrZr* Brazed 773 2.489E−14 4.46268 51 CuCrZr Brazed 923 8.059E−17 7.07106 27 CuCr Brazed 773 7.363E−13 4.17238 30 CuCr Brazed 923 6.047E−11 4.05855 11 *Indicatesthatthestresshasbeenextrapolatedbeyondtheexistingdataandisonlyusedforthepurposeofcomparison. alloys prevent or reduce grain boundary sliding, grain growth, and grain boundary diffusion, the similarities in macroscopic creep properties are likely caused by the Cumatrix dominating the creep properties [82]. Atthistimethereislittledataavailableonthecreep of AM GRCop with the exception of the work con- ducted by Gradl et al. [88] in 2017, which compared creep rates of L-PBF, wrought, plate, brazed plate, and sheet GRCop-84. Limited data is presented but a thoroughdiscussionoftheobservedtrendsisprovided instead. Compared to the other fabrication methods, thecreepresultsoftheL-PBFsamplesweremorecon- sistent, more repeatable, and better fit a linear trend [88]. Gradl et al. state that ‘…the properties of L- PBF GRCop-84 are equal to or exceed the properties ofconventionallyprocessedGRCop-84withtheexcep- tion of the LCF lives’ [88]. Under the same level of stress, the creep rate of L-PBF GRCop-84 is roughly two orders of magnitude lower than that of wrought alloys. For example, the minimum creep rate at 40MPa and 923K is 3×10 −9 s −1 for the L-PBF alloy and 3×10 −7 s −1 for sheet GRCop-84 (when inter- preted from its trend line) [88]. The L-PBF GRCop- 84’screepexponentwascomparabletotheotherfabri- cationmethodswhichagreeswiththepreviousMonk- man-Grantrelationships,anditsdominantmechanism should be the same, although the exact value was not presented for a comparison [88]. Finally, while the Figure 14. (a) Creep rates and (b) creep lives of wrought creep rate is lower, the improved consistency is con- GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 alloys; the GRCop-84 data is from sidered a major benefit to predicting the performance warmrolledplate,ratherthanas-extruded,forhigherconsist- of the AM alloy [88]. The basic understanding of the ency, and the GRCop-42 data is assumed to be as-extruded; origins of L-PBF GRCop-84’s higher creep rate is a redrawnwithpermissionfrom[1]. 418 R.P.MINNECIETAL. subjectforfuturestudiesandcanbepotentiallyrelated thermalfatigue,butmechanicalfatiqueismorereadily tothecharacteristicsofAMmicrostructureanddefect tested by LCF and the trends of LCF and LCTF are structure such as (1) strong build texture and its typically similar. Ellis and Michal’s 1996 publication relationships to build/creep directions, (2) AM defects provides LCF results for only GRCop-84. This LCF such as gas porosity and lack-of-fusion defects, (3) experiment was strain controlled with a triangular grain morphology and grain boundary properties, waveform at a constant strain rate of 0.12min −1 [26]. and (4) the characteristics of precipitates. Unlike its creep data, GRCop-84’s LCF results were more reproducible and consistent [26]. This is one of few publications to present LCF hysteresis loops, and Thermal expansion two representative hysteresis loops from this study Thermalexpansionisaprimaryfactorwhenevaluating are shown in Figure 16. The loops’ shapes and slopes LCTF performance for high-heat-flux applications, were noted to remain relatively constant and margin- especially in the case of the combustion chamber ally increase in stress during cycling indicating mini- liner where the primary failure mode is driven by mal work hardening under the tested conditions [26]. LCTF. Ellis stated that thermal expansion in the com- Compared to NARloy-Z, Ellis and Michal found that bustion chamber liner contributes the majority of the GRCop-84’s LCF performance was either as-good or stress and strain rather than mechanical sources [2]. betterdependingonthedegreeofstrain[26].Therela- ThethermalexpansionsofNARloy-Z,AMZIRC,Glid- tivelyhighvolumefractionofhardCr Nbparticlesare Cop Al-15, GRCop-84, and GRCop-42 are compared believedto bethecauseof thisincrease,byeither pre- inFigure15andTable8asafunctionoftemperature. venting or minimising the development of persistent Thesealloyshavesimilarthermalexpansioncharacter- slipbands,NARloy-Z’sparticlesaretoolowinvolume istics which makes visual comparison and interpret- fraction to have a similar effect [2,26]. ation of the data difficult, so these are also presented Gradl et al. also presented LCF results on wrought as quadratic equation forms of thermal expansion as GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 at room temperature, 673, a function of temperature in Table 8. Of these alloys, and 873K with a fully reversed triangular waveform both GRCop alloys’ thermal expansion is consistently under strain control [82]. The GRCop alloys were lower at temperatures exceeding 700K which should tested according to the total strain range with plastic aid in lowering thermal strain and producing longer strain and shown in Figure 17 [82]. Gradl et al. LCTF lives. The GRCop alloys’ thermal expansions observed limited statistical difference or temperature arecomparableupto900K,thoughGRCop-84’sther- dependence between the GRCop-42’s strain data, so mal expansion is slightly lower above 900K which it was combined into a single trendline [82]. Gradl should be the result of its higher loading content. et al. observed that both alloys did not fail below 0.7% total strain and have nearly equivalent perform- ance from a practical engineering perspective [82]. Low-cycle fatigue behaviour GRCop-84’s strain data was similarly temperature Similartocreep,therearecurrentlyonlyafewavailable independent with the exception of the 873K data. studies on LCF of GRCop alloys and effectively none Theplasticstrain,Figure17(b),showssignificantscat- for LCTF. Mechanical fatigue is not the same as ter for both GRCop-42 and GRCop-84 data points. Figure15.ThermalexpansioncalculatedfromquadraticequationsincludedinTable8;adaptedwithpermissionfrom[2]. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 419 Table8.Quadraticthermalexpansionequationsofhighheatfluxalloyswherethermalexpansion, α(mm/mm),isafunctionoftemperature,T,inunitsofKfromα(T)=A(T)2+B(T)+C;thesevaluesare accurateonlyaboveroomtemperatureandshouldbeconsideredestimates. Approximatecalculated%thermalexpansion, Alloy A B C 100*(mm/mm)at700and900K PureCoppero 4.718E−9 1.268E−5 −4.210E−3 0.74–1.15 NARloy-Z* 3.883E−9 1.414E−5 −4.498E−3 0.73–1.13 AMZIRC** 4.132E−9 1.384E−5 −4.257E−3 0.75–1.15 GlidCop,Al-15** 3.989E−9 1.401E−5 −4.223E−3 0.75–1.16 Cu-1Cr-0.1Zr** 4.947E−9 1.289E−5 −3.968E−3 0.75–1.16 GRCop-84+ 3.420E−9 1.387E−5 −4.380E−3 0.70–1.09 GRCop-42++ 4.718E−9 1.268E−5 −4.210E−3 0.70–1.10 oBasedonrecommendedvaluesofaverageliteraturefrom[1]. *Estimatedfromgraphofthermalexpansion[2],assume±5%accuracy. **ConvertedfromquadraticequationwhereT(°C)andhas±1%reportedaccuracy[3]. +Intheextrudedconditionwith95%confidence;convertedfrompowerlawtoquadraticequation[4]. ++Intheextrudedcondition;estimatedfromgraphassume±5%accuracy[5]. While the strain results were similar between the GRCop-84’shigherstrength[82].Thesetestsarenota alloys, the stress range, Figure 17(c), shows the differ- full representation of the combustion chamber liner ence between the loading fractions. GRCop-84’s stress because mimicking the liner environment in standar- isconsistentlyhigherthanGRCop-42’s,andthediffer- disedtest equipment is not feasible. Theliner’s LCFis ence between them increases with temperature. As primarily LCTF where thermal expansion should play Gradl et al. indicate, this means that GRCop-42 has a a significant role, though, as Figure 14 shows, the lower load bearing capacity, consistent with the GRCop-84 and −42’s thermal expansions are largely Figure16.LCFstress-strainhysteresisloops(a)GRCop-84testedatroomtemperatureand2%totalstrain;(b)GRCop-84testedat 811Kand0.7%totalstrain;datacollectedusingstrain-controlledfatiguetestswithatriangularwaveformataconstantstrainrate of0.12/min;redrawnwithpermissionfrom[1]. 420 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Figure17.LCFtrendsofextrudedGRCop-42(reportedaswrought)withdatapointsandGRCop-84from[1,2](a)LCFstrainranges; (b)LCFplasticstrains;(c)LCFstressrange;RT–673KandRT–873Kindicatethatdatahasbeencombinedfromthesetemperatures toproducethesetrendlines(astherewasnodiscernibledifferenceintrendbetweenthem);redrawnwithpermission. similarupto873K.ComparedtoGRCopalloy’sUTS, Environmental resistance YS,thermalconductivity,andcreepresponse,GlidCop Outside of creep and LCTF, the combustion chamber appears to be a better choice for high-heat-flux appli- liner’s remaining concerns, stemming from the harsh cations like the combustion chamber liner. However, environment, are resistance to H embrittlement and fatigueisamajorfailuremodeincombustionchamber oxidation. High volumes of liquid and high pressure liners,andGlidCopAl-15’sfatiguebehaviourhasbeen gaseous hydrogen in the combustion chamber liner is described as poor, particularly at high temperatures, a major concern. The Nb content of GRCop alloys is compared to GRCop-84 by several sources known to be the most susceptible component to [2,77,78,83]. Similar to creep, LCF results are difficult embrittlementbyformingasolidsolutionandhydrides tocompareduetothevarietyoffactors,andacompari- with hydrogen [98–100]. Ellis et al. [100] performed son of GRCop alloys and GlidCop in the same source thermodynamic calculations with GRCop-84 based could not be located. Takahashi et al. [97] performed on activity and partial pressures. The primary con- LCF tests on GlidCopAl-15 similar to the experiment clusion from this study was that the chemistry of the presented by Gradl et al. [82]. At a total strain range Cr Nbprecipitateswouldcontrol,byreducing,hydro- of1%undervacuumandat473,543,and673K,Glid- 2 gen embrittlement. By adding an excess of Cr, the Cop Al-15 failed at approximately 6000, 3000, and activityof Nbis reduced alongwith therisk ofhydro- 1500 cycles, respectively [97]. Based on the Figure 17 gen embrittlement [98,100]. Ellis and Hastings per- at the same strain, GRCop-84 fails at approximately formed tensile, notched tensile, stress, rupture, and 6000cyclesbetweenroomtemperatureand673Kand LCF tests on extruded GRCop-84 in high pressure 5500 cycles at 873K compared to GRCop-42 which environments including high pressure H , high fails at 4500 cycles between room temperature and 2 pressure He, and samples charged in high pressure 873K [82]. GRCop alloys demonstrate significantly H for8hat922K[99].Theywereunabletofindevi- longerlivesthanGlidCopAl-15whichisinagreement 2 denceoftheformationofhydridesbyeitheropticalor withpreviousassessments. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 421 electron microscopy, changes in fracture morphology, recrystallisation of the microstructure. In high-heat- or statistically significant difference in the mechanical flux applications with operating temperatures above tests [99]. The susceptiblility may change slightly 773K and significant LCF concerns, GRCop alloys between GRCop alloys and fabrication methods and are among the best available. Cu-rich Cu–Cr–Nb should be tested, but ultimately, the H embrittlement alloys, like GRCop, have potential for use in the next islargelydependentontheNbcontentthatisavailable. generation of aerospace rockets and structural high- TheslightexcessofCrappearstobesufficienttocon- heat-flux applications where reusability and long- sume the majority of the Nb in forming the intermet- term use are desired. Small capability improvements talic Cr Nb leaving GRCop-84 with good stability in achievedbyreplacinganexistingmaterialcantranslate hydrogen environments. tolargeeconomicsavingsandenhancedsafetymargins Rocket combustion chamber liners made with and design freedom. In high-heat-flux applications, NARloy-Z were susceptible to blanching during oper- GRCop-84 and GRCop-42 have similar properties ation, so extruded GRCop-84’s oxidation behaviour andperformance,howeverGRCop-84exhibitsslightly was investigated by Thomas-Ogbuji and Humphrey higher mechanical strength while GRCop-42 exhibits andcomparedtoNARloy-ZandOFHCCuwithther- slightly higher thermal conductivity. More statistically mogravimetric analysis (TGA), scanning electron relevant data, microstructure information, and cost microscopy, electron dispersive spectroscopy, and X- metrics will help determine which should be chosen ray diffraction [51,101]. They found that the alloys for any given application though both have merits. had similar oxidation rates at or above 1023K, but at GRCop alloys have potential in future space- intermediate temperatures closer to the operating oriented or high-heat-flux applications, e.g. resistance temperatures between 773 and 1023K, GRCop-84 weldingelectrodesandholders,permanentmetalcast- exhibited significantly higher oxidation resistance ing moulds, vacuum plasma spray nozzles, and fusion [101].Inalaterstudy,Thomas-OgbujiandHumphrey reactor first walls. Fusion reactor first walls carry an determined that GRCop-84’s enhanced resistance is additional irradiation concern with the Nb content of timedependentandlongerexposuresresultinagreater GRCop alloys because Nb can cause H embrittlement difference compared to the other alloys [51]. These by absorption of tritium or deuterium [102]. As long results are likely tied to the formation of stable Cr or as the Cr excess is sufficient in suppressing the for- Nboxidesonthesurfacewhichrequirelowertempera- mation of Nb by consuming it in forming Cr Nb, tures and longer times to form an outer barrier. Tho- this should not be an issue, but the long term effects mas-Ogbuji and Humphrey determined likely oxide and low level waste requirements need to be fully candidates from X-ray diffraction data collected on exhausted before practical use. As candidate combus- oxide scale removed from their samples [101], but tion chamber liner alloys, AM GRCop has shown changes in the powder chemistry and fabrication unique potential for liner fabrication when compared methods are likely to have changed this list of candi- to conventionally wrought material. After HIPing, dates and should be reassessed. The reduced Cr and fully-dense AM GRCop-84 liners have been produced Nb content of GRCop-42 may reduce the formation faster and with properties equal to or better than and efficacy of the oxide layer. theirwroughtcounterparts.AMofGRCopalloyscom- bined with the intricate geometries of combustion chamber liners represents a rare case where AM pro- Summary and future prospects vides optimal processing. The greatest advantage AM Severalmicrostructuraltrendsareapparentwhencom- provides is the ability to manufacture built-in cooling paringthestate-of-the-arthigh-heat-fluxCualloysand channels. New cooling channel designs with thinner Cumetallurgypresentedinthisreviewthathelpunder- walls and more customisablepaths, impossible by tra- stand the essential qualities for optimising high-heat- ditional machining constraints, will improve the cool- flux performance. Thermal conductivity is critical ing efficiency and design constraints of liners. One and should be preserved by reducing impurities in development is the cooling channels can be wrapped the FCC Cu matrix. Higher thermal conductivity aroundthelinerandsplitfromonechannelatthebot- results in lower operating temperatures which helps tom to three at the top rather than being machined prevent thermo-mechanical instability. Conventional straight down the walls [88]. However, both cooling alloying limits the fraction of alloying content to pre- channeldesigndevelopmentsintroducenewwallthin- serve thermal conductivity, so their strengthening ning and stress concentrating concerns. L-PBF’s sur- instead relies on reducing the size of microstructural face finish is relatively poor as it is limited by features.Below773,GRCopalloys’havelowerthermal multiple factors including the quality, size, and sinter- conductivity and mechanical strength compared to ing of the powder which can serve as crack initiation other alloys but has a highly stable microstructure regionsinfatigue,particularlyLCF[103].Theexterior due largely to the high alloying content of Cr Nb ofpartscanbepolishedtoalleviatetheseconcerns,but which is resistant to coarsening and prevents internalchannelsarenoteasilyinspectedorsmoothed. 422 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Theseconcernsmustbeaddressedinqualificationtest- Disclosure statement ing,andtheimprovedcoolingefficiencyprovidedmay Nopotentialconflictofinterestwasreportedbytheauthor(s). lower the temperature sufficiently to reduce fatigue. The composition of GRCop alloys is also likely to be optimised or adjusted in the future for either cost or Funding performance reasons. Ellis et al. [104] have shown that relatively low 0.1–0.5wt-% additions of Zr in This work was supported by National Science Foundation: [Grant NumberIIP1540000]; National Science Foundation: extruded GRCop-84 (to GRCop-84Z) can improve [Grant Number IIP1822186]; Oak Ridge National Labora- the mechanical properties through the formation of tory:[GrantNumberGraduateOpportunities(GO!)]. Cu Zr precipitates [8,104]. These Cu Zr precipitates 5 5 are smaller than the Cr Nb precipitates and add 2 vol.-%moretotheexisting14vol.-%ofCr Nbprecipi- 2 ORCID tates in GRCop-84 and are estimated to improve the strengthby23–39%[8,104]. Thethermalconductivity RobertP.Minneci http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8051-0112 EricA.Lass http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1428-3585 is expected to decrease from new potential scattering JeffreyR.Bunn http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7738-0011 centres, but conductivity results have not been pub- ClaudiaJ.Rawn http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3476-5805 lished [8,104]. It is unknown how additions of Zr wouldinteractinL-PBFandfuturetestingandcharac- terisation is necessary. The additions of Zr demon- References strated improved creep performance and elongation [1] LeeD-Y,VafaiK.Comparativeanalysisofjetimpin- compared to extruded material, and HIPed L-PBF gement and microchannel cooling for high heat flux GRCop-84 has demonstrated similar improvements, applications. Intl J Heat and Mass Transfer. 1999;42 so it is unknown if Zr will significantly benefit L-PBF (9):1555–1568. GRCop. [2] EllisDL.GRCop-84:ahightemperaturecopperalloy Itisthe opinionof the authorsthat therearepoten- for high-heat-flux applications, acles to the development of [3] DhokeyNB,SarveSN,LamsogeHA.Insitusynthesis GRCop alloys for future and current scientists and ofCr2Nbreinforcedcopperalloybyliquidmetallurgy researchers. The first is that the current literature of route.MaterSciForum.2012;710:143–148. GRCop alloys is somewhat limited; past experiments [4] ZinkleS,FabritsievS.Copperalloysforhighheatflux should be reproduced and expanded with updated structureapplications.AtomicPlasma-MaterInteract GRCop alloys, and AM GRCop needs considerably DataFusion(SupplNuclFusion).1994;5:163. [5] Ebadian M, Lin C. A review of high-heat-flux heat more research. Second, the literature lacks a thorough, removal technologies. J Heat Transfer. 2011;133 empirical assessment of microstructure-property (11):110801. relationships for AM GRCop alloys. Comparisons of [6] ZinkleSJ,BusbyJT.Structuralmaterialsforfission& wroughtandAMmaterialmayhelptobetterunderstand fusionenergy.MaterToday.2009;12(11):12–19. the microstructure-property relationships. A prime [7] BerlinGN.Managingthevariabilityoffirebehavior. FireTechnology.1980;16(4):287–302. example is understanding why the creep results of AM [8] Ellis DL, Lerch BA. Improvement of GRCop-84 GRCophavelessscatterthanwrought.Thelastobstacle through the addition of zirconium; byindustry 2012-216985. andresearchersoutsideoflGM.Precipitationstrengthenedhigh ture and understanding of the alloy will likely bring in strength, high conductivity Cu-Cr-Nb alloys pro- new researchers who may elucidate the principles sup- duced by chill block melt spinning. Final Report Ph.D.Thesis:CaseWesternReserveUniversity;1989. portingtheseobservationsandaddtotheliterature. [10] ProtzC,BowmanR,CooperK,etal.Additivemanu- facturing of low cost upper stage propulsion com- ponents. Proceedings of the Joint Army Navy Acknowledgements on Committee Meeting (IPC); 2014 Sept 3–5; The authors would like to acknowledge the Manufacturing Huntsville,AL. and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC), made [11] ProtzC,CooperK,EllisD,etal.Additivelymanufac- possible through awards NSF IIP-1540000 (Phase I) and tured low cost upper stage combustion chamber. NSFIIP-1822186(PhaseII)fromtheNationalScienceFoun- Proceedings of the Joint Army Navy ive Research Center Force (JANNAF) 9th Liquid Propulsion Joint program (IUCRC). RPM also acknowledges the financial SubcommitteeMeeting;2016Dec5–8;Phoenix,AZ. supportoftheCenterforMaterialsProcessingattheUniver- [12] GradlPR,ProtzCS,EllisDL,etal.Progressinaddi- sityofTennessee,KnoxvilleandOakRidgeNationalLabora- tively manufactured copper-alloy GRCop-84, tory’s Graduate Opportunities (GO!) Program. Special GRCop-42, and bimettalic combustionchambers for thanks to David Ellis of ines. Proceedings of 70th on this International Astronautical Congress; 2019 Oct 21– reviewandhistoricalinformation. 25;Washington,D.C. INTERNATIONALMATERIALSREVIEWS 423 [13] Williamson RA. Exploring the unknown: selected [35] Tritt TM. Thermal conductivity: theory, properties, documentsinthehistory of theU.S. civilspace pro- and applications. New York: Kluwer Academic/ gram,1999:161–404,RO.SSMEtoRS-25:challengesofadaptinga [36] GrozaJ,GibelingJ.Principlesofparticleselectionfor heritage engine to a new vehicle architecture. dispersion-strengthened copper. Mater Sci Eng: A. Proceedings of the 6th European Conference for 1993;171(1-2):115–125. Aeronautics and Space Sciences; 2015 June 29–July [37] Simon SH. The Oxford solid state basics. Oxford: 2,Krakow,Poland. OUP;2013. [15] Esposito JJ, Zabora RF. Thrust chamber life predic- [38] Kasap SO. Principles of electronic materials and tion. Volume 1: mechanical and physical properties devices.Vol.2.NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006. of high performance rocket nozzle materials. [39] Anderson W, Sisco J, Sung I. Rocket combustor s. In 14th Annual Thermal [16] Kazaroff JM, Repas GA. Conventionally cast and and Fluids Analysis Workshop (TFAWS); 2003 Aug forged copper alloy for high-heat-flux thrust 18–22;Hampton,VA. chambers.erry M. A statistical study of the [17] Cook RT, Coffey GA. Space shuttle orbiter engine effects of processing upon the creep properties of main combustion chamber cooling and life. GRCop-84.MaterSciEng:A.2015;640:1–15. Proceedings of the 9th Propulsion Conference; 1973 [41] Halford GR. Low-cycle thermal fatigue. ] Wadel MF. Comparison of high aspect ratio cooling [42] ASTM E139-11, Standard test methods for conduct- channel designs for a rocket combustion chamber ing creep, creep-rupture, and stress-rupture tests of with development of an optimized design. (PA): TM-1998-206313. ASTMInternational;2018. [19] AndrusJ,BordeauR.Thrustchambermaterialtech- [43] Kassner ME. Fundamentals of creep in metals and nologyprogram.Elsevier;2015. [20] Krishna SC, et al. Microstructure and mechanical [44] KasperHJ.Thrustchamberlifeprediction.Proceedings properties of Cu-Ag-Zr alloy. J Mater Eng Perform. of advanced high pressure O2/H2 technology: 36–43; 2013;22(12):3884–3889. 1984Jun27–29,Hutsville,Al,inengine.TheSpace [45] DaiX,RayA.Damage-mitigatingcontrolofareusa- Congress(R)Proceedings.5;1980. blerocketengine:partI—Lifepredictionofthemain [22] GrozaJ.Heat-resistantdispersion-strengthenedcop- thrustchamberwall.JDynSystMeasContr.1996;118 peralloys.JMaterEngPerform.1992;1(1):113–121. (3):401–408. [23] DieterGE,BaconDJ.Mechanicalmetallurgy.Vol.3. [46] Popp M, Schmidt G. Rocket engine combustion NewYork:McGraw-hill;1986. chamber design concepts for enhanced life. In 32nd [24] PorterDA,EasterlingKE,SherifM.Phasetransform- Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit. 1996 July ations in metals and alloys (Revised Reprint). Boca 1–3;LakeBuenaVista,Fl. Raton(Fl):CRCPress;2009. [47] Quentmeyer R. Rocket combustion chamber life- [25] Martin JW. Precipitation hardening: theory and enhancingdesign concepts.In26thJoint Propulsion applications. 2nd. Woburn (MA): Butterworth- Conference;1993June28–30;Monterey,CA. Heinemann;2012. [48] Ogbuji L. A table-top technique for assessing the [26] EllisDL,MichalGM.Mechanicalandthermalprop- blanching resistance of Cu alloys. Oxid Met. ertiesoftwoCu-Cr-NballoysandNARloy-Z.[49] Woods S, Lee JA. Hydrogen embrittlement; ndmicrostruc- TM-2016-218602. tural stability of wrought, laser, and electron beam [50] ChandlerW,WalterR.Testingtodeterminetheeffect glazed NARloy-Z alloy at elevated temperatures. J of high-pressure hydrogen environments on the MaterSci.1997;32(14):3891–3903. mechanical properties of metals, in hydrogen [28] Callister WD, Rethwisch DG. Materials science and embrittlement testing. Conshohoken (PA): ASTM engineering:anintroduction.NewYork:Wiley;2018. International;1974. [29] AndersonKR.Effectsofthermalandmechanicalpro- [51] Thomas-Ogbuji LU. Oxidation behavior of GRCop- cessing on microstructures and desired properties of 84 copper alloy assessed; r-Nb Alloys. Cook MB, Murphy KL, Schneider T. Advanced [30] Anderson KR, Groza JR. Microstructural size effects materials for exploration task research results. in high-strength high-conductivity Cu-Cr-Nb alloys. 32(5):1211–1224. [53] Quentmeyer RJ. Thrust chamber thermal barrier [31] JechRW,etal.Rapidsolidificationviameltspinning: coatingtechniques.JOM.1984;36(4):41–45. [54] BatakisAP,VoganJ.Rocketthrustchamberthermal [32] Christian JW. The theory of transformations in barriercoatings.ord:Pergamon;2002. [55] BhatB,GilmoreH,HolmesR.Thermalbarriercoat- [33] LifshitzIM,SlyozovVV.Thekineticsofprecipitation ingsforthespaceshuttlemainengineturbineblades. from supersaturated solid solutions. J Phys Chem Abstractandfigures;:35–50. [56] Quentmeyer RJ. Rocket thrust chamber thermal [34] Poirier DR, Geiger G. Transport phenomena in barriercoatings.ham, Switzerland: Springer; [57] NesbittJA,BrindleyWJ.Thermalanalysisofthermal 2016. barrier coatings in a high-heat-flux environment. 424 R.P.MINNECIETAL. Proceedings of the 1988 Conference on Earth-to- rocketnozzles.Part2:chnology; 1988 May 10–12; teredcopperalloys.rohHC,EllisDL,LoewenthalWS.Comparisonof [58] Holmes R, McKechnie T. Vacuum application of GRCop-84tootherCualloyswithhighthermalcon- thermal barrier plasma coatings. Proceedings of the ductivities.JMaterEngPerform.2008;17(4):594–606. 1988 79] AndersonKR,etal.Microstructuralevolutionandther- Earth-to-Orbit Propulsion Technology; 1988 May malstabilityofprecipitation-strengthenedCu8Cr4Nb 10–12. alloy.MaterSciEng:A.1993;169(1–2):167–175. [59] Arnold SM, Butler DT Jr, Pinders M-J. Analysis of [80] Lawley A. Atomization of specialty alloy powders. factors affecting the performance of RLV thrust cell JOM.1981;33(1):13–18. liners.ion of metal powders. Annu Rev [60] EllisD.PrivateCommunication;Mar.2020. MaterSci.1978;8(1):49–71. [61] Nikolayev A, Rozenber VM. Investigation of phase- [82] Gradl PR, Protz C, Cooper K, et al. GRCop-42 diagram of copper-rich Cu-Nb-Cr alloys. Russ Development and Hot-fire testing using additive Metall.1972;5:118–121. manufacturingpowderbedfusionforchannel-cooled [62] Anderson KR. High temperature coarsening of combustion chambers. Proceedings of the AIAA Cr2Nb precipitates in Cu-8 Cr-4 Nb alloy; M.S. Propulsion and Energy 2019 Forum; 2019 Aug 19– Thesis:UniversityofCaliforniaDavis;1996. 22;Indianapolis,IN. [63] LiuX,etal.Experimentaldeterminationandthermo- [83] Russell CK, et al. Friction stir welding of GRCop-84 dynamiccalculationofthephaseequilibriaintheCu– for combustion chamber liners. J Propul Power. Cr–Nb and Cu–Cr–Co systems. J Alloys Compd. 2007;23(4):756–762. 2009;478(1–2):287–296. [84] Gradl PR, Brandsmeier W, Greene SE.Channel wall [64] SteinF,PalmM,SauthoffG.Structureandstabilityof nozzle manufacturing and hot-fire testing using a Laves phases. Part I. Critical assessment of factors laser wire direct closeout technique for liquid rocket controlling Laves phase stability. Intermetallics. engines. Proceedings of the 2018 Joint Propulsion 2004;12(7–9):713–720. Conference;2018July9–11,2018;Cincinnati,OH. [65] Takasugi T, Yoshida M, Hanada S. Deformability [85] Hayes C, Brown E, Kappes B. Characterization of improvement in C15 NbCr2 intermetallics by selective laser melted GRCop-84. Proceedings of the addition of ternary elements. Acta Mater. 1996;44 2018 Joint Propulsion Conference; 2018 July 9–11; (2):669–674. Cincinnati,OH. [66] Lu H-J, et al. Thermodynamic modeling of Cr–Nb [86] Ellis DL, Loewenthal WS, Yun H-M. Tensile and Zr–Cr with extension to the ternary Zr–Nb–Cr PropertiesofGRCop-84.134–143. [87] Tran TQ, et al. 3D printing of highly pure copper. [67] Jiang Y, et al. Thermodynamic re-assessment of Metals.2019;9(7):756. binary Cr-Nb system down to 0 K. Calphad. [88] GradlPR,GreeneSE,ProtzCS,etal.Developmentand 2018;62:109–118. hot-firetestingofadditivelymanufacturedcoppercom- [68] Chakrabarti D, Laughlin D. The Cr-Cu (chromium- bustionchambersforliquidrocketengineapplications. copper) system. Bull Alloy Phase Diagrams. 1984;5 Proceedings of the 53rd AIAA/SAE/ASEE Joint (1):59–68. PropulsionConference;2017July10–12;Atlanta,GA. [69] Vettraino L, et al. Influence of processing on the [89] GradlPR,GreeneSE,ProtzC,etal.Additivemanu- microstructure of Cu–8Cr–4Nb. J Mater Sci. facturingofliquidrocketenginecombustiondevices: 2008;43(19):6546–6555. asummaryofprocessdevelopmentsandhot-firetest- [70] Okamoto H. Cu-Nb (copper-Niobium). J Phase ingresults.Proceedingsofthe2018JointPropulsion EquilibDiffus.2012;33(4):344–344. Conference;2018July9–11;Cincinnati,OH. [71] Ellis D, Michal G. Formation of Cr and Cr2Nb pre- [90] CooperK,etal.Three-dimensionalprintingGRCop- cipitates in rapidly solidified Cu-Cr-Nb ribbon. 42.(1–2):210–216. [91] Groza JR. Microstructural features of a new precipi- [72] EllisDL,MichalGM,OrthNW.Productionandpro- tation-strengthened Cu 8Cr 4Nb alloy. Mater cessing of Cu-Cr-Nb alloys. 1990. [92] Anderson KR, et al. High-performance dispersion- [73] BhatBN,etal.AerospacematerialsandApplications. strengthened Cu-8 Cr-4 Nb alloy. Metall Mater Reston(VA):AmericanInstituteofAeronauticsand TransA.1995;26(9):2197–2206. Astronautics(AIAA);2018. [93] EllisDL,KellerDJ,NathalM.Thermophysicalprop- [74] Piatti G, Boerman D. Hot tensile characteristics and ertiesofGRCop-84.0.65 Cr-0.08 Zr alloy for [94] DeckerM,GrozaJ,GibelingJ.Creeppropertiesofan fusion reactor applications. J Nucl Mater. 1991;185 extruded copper–8% chromium–4% niobium alloy. (1):29–38. MaterSciEng:A.2004;369(1-2):101–111. [75] ConwayJ,StentzR,BerlingJ.Hightemperature,low- [95] Loewenthal WS, Ellis DL. Sources of variation in cycle fatigue of copper-base alloys in argon. Part 1: creeptesting. 12 alloys at 1000 F (538 C). [96] Lerch BA, Arnold SM, Ellis DL. Reversible and irre- behavior of GRCop-84. [76] ConwayJ,StentzR,BerlingJ.High-temperature,low- ed copper-base alloys for [97] TakahashiS,etal.Fatiguelifepredictionforhigh-heat- rocket nozzles. Part 1: NARloy-Z. elastic-plastic 134627;1974. analysis.JSynchrotronRadiat.2008;15(2):144–150. [77] Conway JB, Stentz R, Berling J. High-temperature, [98] EllisDL,HastingsK.EffectsofHydrogenonGRCop- low-cycle fatigue of advanced copper-base alloys for 84.EVIEWS 425 [99] Ellis DL, Hastings BK. Hydrogen embrittlement [103] Chen Z., Cao Sheng, Wu Xinhua, et al. Surface resistance of GRCop-84. Int J Hydrogen Energy. roughness and fatigue properties of selective laser 2008;33(20):5661–5671. melted Ti–6Al–4V alloy. In: Froes F, Boyer R, [100] EllisDL,MisraAK,DreshfieldRL.Effectofhydrogen editors. Additive manufacturing for the exposureonCu-8Cr-4NbAlloy.Elsevier; 2019. p. [101] Thomas-Ogbuji LU, Humphrey DL, Greenbauer- 283–299. Seng L. Oxidation behavior of GRCop-84 (Cu-8Cr- [104] Ellis DL, Lerch BA. Increased mechanical properties 4Nb) at intermediate and high temperatures. through the addition of Zr to GRCop-84. t Army Navy opper alloys for DEMO Force (JANNAF) 8th Modeling and Simulation high heat flux components. Phys Scr. 2015;2016 Joint Subcommittee Meeting; 2011 Dec 5–9; (T167):014004. Huntsville,Al.